CHAPTER 1£Coalitions in the MindIntellectuals are people who produce decontextualized ideas. These ideas aremeant to be true or significant apart from any locality, and apart from anyoneconcretely putting them into practice. A mathematical formula claims to betrue in and of itself, whether or not it is useful, and apart from whoever believesit. A work of literature, or of history, claims the same sort of status, insofaras it is conceived as art or scholarship: part of a realm that is higher, morevalid, less constrained by particular occasions of human action than ordinarykinds of thoughts and things. Philosophy has the peculiarity of periodicallyshifting its own grounds, but always in the direction of claiming or at leastseeking the standpoint of greatest generality and importance. This continuesto be the case when the content of philosophy is to assert that everything istransient, historically situated, of local value only; for the relativistic statementitself is asserted as if it were valid. This is an old conundrum of the skepticaltradition, discussed at great length in Hellenistic philosophy. Skeptics in attemptingto avoid making assertions implicitly stand on a meta-distinctionamong levels of assertion of varying force. This illustrates the sociological pointadmirably, for only the intellectual community has the kind of detachmentfrom ordinary concerns in which statements of this sort are meaningful.Intellectual products are felt, at least by their creators and consumers, tobelong to a realm which is peculiarly elevated. They are part of Durkheim’s“la vie sérieuse.” We can recognize them as sacred objects in the strongestsense; they inhabit the same realm, make the same claims to ultimate reality,as religion. “Truth” is the reigning sacred object of the scholarly community,as “art” is for literary/artistic communities; these are simultaneously theirhighest cognitive and moral categories, the locus of highest value, by which allelse is judged. As Bloor (1976) has pointed out about mathematics, intellectualtruth has all the characteristics Durkheim stated for the sacred objects ofreligion: transcending individuals, objective, constraining, demanding respect.What gives particular ideas and texts this sacred status? It is possible to19state a sociological theory of very wide scope, which tells us the conditionsunder which symbols are generated and are felt to be morally and cognitivelybinding. This is the theory of interaction rituals. It connects symbols to socialmembership, and hence both to emotions of solidarity and to the structure ofsocial groups. Such a theory, I will attempt to show, accounts for variations insolidarity and belief found across different social structures, and for the dynamicsof individual lives. A specific form of this emotional energy is what wecall creativity.Our first theoretical problem is to show why intellectual products have theirown kind of sacred status, different from the more ordinary sacred objectswith which everyday life is also permeated and which hold together personalfriendships, property relations, and authority structures. I must also show whythe sacred objects of intellectuals under the guiding category of “truth” aredifferent from the sacredness of religion proper in its moral community offaith. After this, I consider how intellectuals produce and circulate symbols intheir own highly stratified communities.General Theory of Interaction RitualsLet us begin at the site of all action: the local situation. All events take placein a here-and-now as concrete and particular. The perspective of micro-sociology,which analyzes the structures and dynamics of situations, is all too easilyinterpreted as a focus on the individual actor or agent. But a situation is justthe interaction of conscious human bodies, for a few hours, minutes, or evenmicro-seconds; the actor is both less than the whole situation and larger, as aunit in time which stretches across situations. The detached agent who makesevents happen is as artificial a construction as the detached non-social observer,who represents the idealized vantage point of classical epistemology. The self,the person, is more macro than the situation (strictly speaking, the person ismeso); and it is analytically derivative because the self or agent is constructedby the dynamics of social situations.The local situation is the starting point of analysis, not the ending point.The micro-situation is not the individual, but it penetrates the individual, andits consequences extend outward through social networks to as macro a scaleas one might wish. The whole of human history is made up of situations. Noone has ever been outside of a local situation; and all our views of the world,all our gathering of data, come from here. Philosophical problems of the realityof the world, of universals, of other minds, of meaning, implicitly start withthis situatedness. I will not pursue these epistemological problems here, exceptto note that if one refuses to admit anything beyond the local, one arrives atsome version of skepticism or relativism; if one idealizes what happens in20 • The Skeleton of Theorysituations as the following of rules and uses these inferred rules as a tool forconstructing the rest of the world, one arrives at a type of idealism.In sociology, emphasis on the primacy of the local was introduced bysymbolic interactionism and radicalized by ethnomethodology; as a researchtechnique and as an explicit epistemology, the stance has been picked up bythe branch of sociologists of science who study the local production of scientificknowledge in laboratory sites. To deny that anything exists other than the localis true in one sense, misleading in another. It is true that nothing exists whichis not thoroughly local; if it did not exist locally, where could it possibly befound? But no local situation stands alone; situations surround one another intime and space. The macro-level of society should be conceived not as a verticallayer above the micro, as if it were in a different place, but as the unfurling ofthe scroll of micro-situations. Micro-situations are embedded in macro-patterns,which are just the ways that situations are linked to one another;causality—agency, if you like—flows inward as well as outward. What happenshere and now depends on what has happened there and then. We can understandmacro-patterns, without reifying them as if they were self-subsistingobjects, by seeing the macro as the dynamics of networks, the meshing ofchains of local encounters that I call interaction ritual chains.The sociology of ideas (which as a research field has become concernedmainly with the sociology of scientific knowledge) encounters serious limits inunderstanding knowledge as a purely local construction. The significant ideaswhich are the topics of intellectual history are those which are carried translocally.Examining the local site of knowledge production misses what anotherbranch of the sociology of science has been good at investigating: the groupsof thinkers, the chains of network contacts, the rivalries between one segmentof an argumentative community and another. Groups and chains face bothinward and outward: inward because what we mean by an intellectual groupis just that its members assemble face-to-face often enough to build up intenseexchanges of ritual interaction, forging idea-emblems, identities, emotionalenergies that persist and sometimes dominate others; outward because chainsare a way of referring to long-distance links across situations. How is thislinking done? The impacts of situations both inward and outward are parts ofthe same process. Intensely focused situations penetrate the individual, formingsymbols and emotions which are both the medium and the energy of individualthought and the capital which makes it possible to construct yet furthersituations in an ongoing chain.“Interaction ritual” is Goffman’s (1967) term, by which he calls attentionto the fact that the formal religious rituals which Durkheim ([1912] 1961)analyzed are the same type of event which happens ubiquitously in everydaylife. Religious rituals are archetypes of interactions which bind members intoCoalitions in the Mind • 21a moral community, and which create symbols that act as lenses through whichmembers view their world, and as codes by which they communicate. Thereis a wealth of anthropological research which demonstrates the importance ofrituals in tribal societies, and the power of their attendant category schemesto control what people take for granted and what they cannot even think about.In complex societies like our own, these category schemes take on a greatervariety corresponding to the relations among groups in a stratified social order(Douglas, 1973); Bernstein (1971–1975) shows them embedded in the languageof social classes. Goffman’s (1959, 1971) ethnography of everyday life investigatedmore explicitly the Durkheimian mechanism of how social solidarity isproduced. For Goffman, every fleeting encounter is a little social order, a sharedreality constructed by solidarity rituals which mark its entering and its closingthrough formal gestures of greeting and departure, and by the little marks ofrespect which idealize selves and occasions.Let us broaden this perspective still further. The ritualism of social encountersis variable; everything that happens can be arrayed on a continuum fromthe most intense production of social solidarity and sacred symbolism, downthrough the mundane and fleeting rituals of ordinary life, and down still furtherto encounters which produce no solidarity and no meaning at all. Understandingthe source of this variability provides us with a key to the structuringof local encounters; interactions at different degrees along this continuumdetermine just how strongly are generated social symbols and emotions, whichcarry over into subsequent situations. A general theory of interaction ritual(which I abbreviate IR) is simultaneously a key to the sociology of individualthinking and emotion, and to the varied linkage from one local situation toanother.The following are the ingredients of any interaction ritual:1. a group of at least two people is physically assembled;2. they focus attention on the same object or action, and each becomesaware that the other is maintaining this focus;3. they share a common mood or emotion.At first glance, this seems to miss the core of the usual definition of“ritual”—stereotyped actions such as reciting verbal formulas, singing, makingprescribed gestures, and wearing traditional costumes. These are the superficialaspects of a formal ritual, which have their social effect only because theyensure a mutual focus of attention. The same focus can occur implicitly inwhat we may call natural rituals. To the extent that these ingredients aresustained, they build up social effects:4. The mutual focus of attention and the shared mood cumulatively intensify.Bodily motions, speech acts, and vocal micro-frequencies become attuned22 • The Skeleton of Theoryinto a shared rhythm. As micro-coordination becomes intense, participants aretemporarily united in a shared reality, and experience a boundary or membranebetween that situation and whoever is outside it.5. As a result, the participants feel they are members of a group, with moralobligations to one another. Their relationship becomes symbolized by whateverthey focused on during their ritual interaction. Subsequently, when persons usethese symbols in discourse or thought, they are tacitly reminded of their groupmembership. Symbols are charged with social meaning by the experience ofinteraction rituals; and symbols run down and lose their compelling significanceif such encounters are not reenacted within a period of time. Hencethere is a fluctuation in the daily relevance of symbols. Symbols remindmembers to reassemble the group, whether by having another church service,another tribal ceremony, another birthday party, another conversation with afriend, another scholarly conference. The survival of symbols, and the creationof new ones, depends on the extent to which groups reassemble periodically.1Symbols which are sufficiently charged with feelings of membership carry theindividual along certain courses of action even when the group is not present.Well-charged symbols become emblems to be defended against desecrators andoutsiders; they are boundary markers of what is proper, and battle flags forthe precedence of groups.6. Individuals who participate in IRs are filled with emotional energy, inproportion to the intensity of the interaction. Durkheim called this energy“moral force,” the flow of enthusiasm that allows individuals in the throes ofritual participation to carry out heroic acts of fervor or self-sacrifice. I wouldemphasize another result of group-generated emotional energy: it charges upindividuals like an electric battery, giving them a corresponding degree ofenthusiasm toward ritually created symbolic goals when they are out of thepresence of the group. Much of what we consider individual personalityconsists of the extent to which persons carry the energy of intense IRs; at thehigh end, such persons are charismatic; a little less intensely, they are forcefulleaders and the stars of sociability; modest charges of emotional energy makepassive individuals; and those whose IR participation is meager and unsuccessfulare withdrawn and depressed. Emotional energy (abbreviated EE) flowsfrom situations when individuals participate in IRs to situations when they arealone. Encounters have an emotional aftermath; it is by this route that personscan pursue their interior lives and their individual trajectories, and yet beshaped by the nodes of social interaction. EE ebbs away after a period of time;to renew it, individuals are drawn back into ritual participation to rechargethemselves.All social life is an ecology of human bodies, coming together and movingapart across the landscape. Where individuals meet, their encounters have inCoalitions in the Mind • 23varying degrees the qualities which generate interaction rituals. In principle,we can predict what will happen: how much solidarity will be generated invarious situations, what kinds of symbols are created and how attached particularpeople are to them. These encounters produce an ongoing flow of socialmotivations, as people come away from each situation with a store of chargedsymbols (which can be called cultural capital, or CC), and with emotionalenergies. Persons are attracted to those situations in which they can make thebest use of their previously acquired cultural capital and symbolic resources tofocus discursive action and thereby generate further solidarity.2 Individual livesare chains of interaction rituals; the meshing of these chains constitutes everythingthat is social structure in all its myriad shapes.Consider now the peculiar kinds of interaction ritual chains that constitutethe world of intellectuals.The Interaction Rituals of IntellectualsIntellectual groups have something in common with all social memberships.Every local group is attached to its symbols; but the nature of these symbolsvaries, and so does members’ self-consciousness in relation to them. Isolatedcommunities, where the same lineup of persons is recurrently thrown together,tend to reify their symbols as if they were concrete objects; at the extremes ofself-subsistent tribes or deliberately separated cult communities, the emotionalattachment to symbols is personified as magical or religious forces. At the otherextreme of the continuum, encounters take place at the shifting nodes offar-flung networks, where a changing cast of characters negotiates fleetingrelations with a mixture of cultural capitals. These patterns result in abstractsymbols, which participants treat with detachment and reflexive awareness oftheir social relativity. Intellectuals are a peculiar combination of the intenselylocalistic and the detached and cosmopolitan, of Durkheimian mechanical andorganic solidarity.Intellectual sacred objects are created in communities which spread widelyyet are turned inward, oriented toward exchange with their own membersrather than outsiders, and which claim the sole right to decide reflectively onthe validity of their ideas. Purely local groups such as the tribe or the circle offriends are primarily concerned with their own solidarity and identity; they donot make the kind of universalistic and transcendental claim for their symbolsthat intellectuals do for their “truth.” Intellectuals are much more reflexivelyand self-analytically aware of their group identity than are lay groups. Intellectualslook on themselves from the abstract standpoint of historical, philosophical,or even sociological or psychological reflection. Artists have historicallyacquired a similarly haughty attitude about their art.24 • The Skeleton of TheoryWhat is it about the social interactions of intellectuals that creates thoseabstractly decontextualized symbols which go under the guiding banner of“truth”? The distinctive IRs of intellectuals are those occasions on whichintellectuals come together for the sake of their serious talk: not to socialize,nor to be practical. Intellectuals set themselves apart from other networks ofsocial life in the act of turning toward one another. The discussion, the lecture,the argument, sometimes the demonstration or the examination of evidence:these are the concrete activities from which the sacred object “truth” arises.There is a rival possibility. The distinctive activities of intellectuals arereading and writing; an “egghead” is someone whose nose is always in a book,someone always writing things that no one, perhaps, ever reads. Intellectuals’writings are not personal letters to an individual who will read them andrespond. The lay viewpoint, if it is unabashed, sees this clearly enough, likethe duke of Gloucester, upon being presented with a new volume of Declineand Fall of the Roman Empire: “Another damned, thick, square book! Alwaysscribble, scribble, scribble! Eh, Mr. Gibbon?”And indeed this is true. Intellectuals are especially oriented toward thewritten word. Especially in the modern world, they experience their creativityalone and on paper, though they may at some point report it orally. And if theearliest moments of creation may sometimes be vocal or mental, intellectualsnevertheless feel the compulsion to get their ideas on paper, and not only thatbut “in print.” Whether anyone reads them or not,3 there is a powerfulsymbolic payoff in getting one’s works published; it moves them out of therealm of privacy and into the realm of the public (the intellectual public, thatis, which alone counts). Intellectuals tend to feel that an idea has not fullyentered into their reality until it is in the system of cross-referenced books andjournals which constitutes the products of the intellectual community.Nevertheless, although lectures, discussions, conferences, and other realtimegatherings would seem to be superfluous in a world of texts, it is exactlythese face-to-face structures which are most constant across the entire historyof intellectual life. Writing, of course, would have been less important in earlyintellectual history, since implements were expensive and the process of publicationlaborious. But after the printing revolution (around 1000 c.e. in Sungdynasty China; by 1450 in Europe), it should have been increasingly the casethat intellectuals carry out their activities without ever meeting one another.There is no such trend. As we shall see in considerable detail throughout thefollowing chapters, the basic form of intellectual communities has remainedmuch the same for over two thousand years. Key intellectuals cluster in groupsin the 1900s c.e. much as in the 400s b.c.e. The personal contacts betweeneminent teachers and later-to-be-eminent students make up the same kinds ofchains across the generations. And this is so even though communicationsCoalitions in the Mind • 25technology has become increasingly available, and the numbers of intellectualshave increased enormously from on the order of hundreds in Confucius’ China,to the million scientists and scholars publishing today.Intellectual life hinges on face-to-face situations because interaction ritualscan take place only on this level. Intellectual sacred objects can be created andsustained only if there are ceremonial gatherings to worship them. This is whatlectures, conferences, discussions, and debates do: they gather the intellectualcommunity, focus members’ attention on a common object uniquely their own,and build up distinctive emotions around those objects. But what is it thatdistinguishes such gatherings of intellectuals from any other kind of IR? Onedifference is in the structure of attention. The key intellectual event is a lectureor a formal debate, a period of time when one individual holds the floor todeliver a sustained argument on a particular topic. This is different from thegive-and-take of sociable conversations, which typically cannot reach anycomplex or abstract level because the focus shifts too often. Intellectuals givingtheir attention for half an hour or more to one viewpoint, developed as aunified stream of discourse, are thereby elevating the topic into a larger, moreencompassing sacred object than the little fragmentary tokens of ordinarysociable ties.This gives us part of the answer. It is not enough, since there are other layoccasions on which one individual monopolizes the discourse. Controlling whogets to speak is the principal mode of enacting authority on the micro-level;any boss, chief, high-ranking officer, or authoritarian parent also can controlsuch a one-way structure of discourse. Other IRs are closer to intellectuallectures: political speeches, sermons, entertainments, and commemorative addresses.A speaker holds the floor for fairly long periods—and, he or she hopes,the rapt attention of a large audience. These occasions have the ritual structureof public events or festive breaks in community routine, and thus are someway along the continuum toward the “transcendental” qualities that intellectualrituals have. Despite these similarities, intellectual IRs differ in the natureof their focus and in the relationship between speaker and audience. Theintellectual IR consists not in giving orders or practical information but inexpounding a worldview, a claim for understanding taken as an end in itself.The audience is in the stance of pure listeners, not subordinates nor participantsin the moral community of faith which is invoked by religious ritual. Intellectualdiscourse focuses implicitly on its autonomy from external concerns andits reflexive awareness of itself.What makes it possible for intellectuals to take this distinctive stance? Is itbecause intellectuals are especially immersed in reading and writing? The keyintellectual ritual, the lecture, is one that has been prepared for by reading arelevant background of texts; and its contents are typically on the way to26 • The Skeleton of Theorybecoming published (if not there already). An intellectual IR is generally asituational embodiment of the texts which are the long-term life of the discipline.Lectures and texts are chained together: this is what makes the distinctivenessof the intellectual community, what sets it off from any other kind ofsocial activity.It is not surprising, then, that intellectual communities arose historically atthe same time as public systems of writing. This can be said more precisely. Itis not merely that an alphabet or ideograph system should be invented and putinto use for keeping administrative or commercial tallies or making religiousinscriptions. Such writing existed in Egypt and Mesopotamia, many centuriesbefore the existence of an intellectual community. What is needed is a socialarrangement for writing texts of some length and distributing them to readersat a distance, an autonomous network for intellectual communication. AsGoody and Watt (1968), Havelock (1982), and others have pointed out,writing enables one to transcend the immediate present; it is a gateway toabstraction and generality. Intellectuals, as the community uniquely orientedtoward writing—those who live for the production and passing on of texts—could only come into existence with the text-distribution structure. Their idealsof truth and wisdom are the central sacred objects of this structure. But asystem of written communication is not enough. We see this in the early textsthemselves. The breakthrough into intellectual abstraction in India is shownin the Upanishads, which depict dialogues among sages and lecture-like guidanceby masters of disciples. In China the corresponding period is depicted inthe Analects of Confucius, again in one-sided dialogues dominated by themaster. In Greece the intellectual dialogue was made famous by Plato andimitated by succeeding generations. Structurally these are not ordinary conversations;rather they give a leading role to one speaker, who guides the sustainedthread of argument throughout.Without face-to-face rituals, writings and ideas would never be charged upwith emotional energy; they would be Durkheimian emblems of a dead religion,whose worshippers never came to the ceremonies. Texts do not merelytranscend the immediate particulars of the here-and-now and push towardabstraction and generality. To be oriented toward the writings of intellectualsis to be conscious of the community itself, stretching both backwards andforwards in time. Intellectual events in the present—lectures, debates, discussions—take place against an explicit backdrop of past texts, whether buildingupon them or critiquing them. Intellectuals are peculiarly conscious of theirpredecessors. And their own productions are directed toward unseen audiences.Even when they lecture to an immediate group, perhaps of personalstudents, disciples, or colleagues, the message is implicitly part of an ongoingchain, which will be further repeated, discussed, or augmented in the future.Coalitions in the Mind • 27Members of the audience in intellectual rituals are in a distinctively nonpassivesituation. It is a deep-seated part of intellectual structures that questionsare asked, debates take place; polemics and denunciations also often occur, ina circulating structure that resembles equally the kula ring, the potlatch, andthe vendetta. Even when intellectuals sit silently in the audience, they areconscious of their own part as members of this ongoing community. Their ownideas have been formed by the chain from the past; the situation before themis merely one more link in that formation. They will go on to incorporate theseideas in their own future creations and discourses—at least, they are siftingthem through to see whether these are materials worthy to take in for thispurpose.The crucial focus of an intellectual group is the consciousness of the group’scontinuity itself as an activity of discourse, rather than the particular contentsof its discussions. Lectures do not always convince; conferences rarely resultin unanimity. The intellectual groups that I chart in this book each containeda range of opinion. Socrates’ circle was taken up with debates; the network ofthe Neo-Confucians in Sung China had its internal divergences; leading membersof intellectual circles, whether Jena-Weimar Idealists, the Vienna Circle,or the Paris existentialists, went in different directions. The ritual focus ofgroup solidarity is not so much on the level of particular statements and beliefs,but on the activity itself. The focus is on a peculiar kind of speech act: thecarrying out of a situation-transcending dialogue, linking past and future texts.A deep-seated consciousness of this common activity is what links intellectualstogether as a ritual community.This, then, is the intellectual ritual. Intellectuals gather, focus their attentionfor a time on one of their members, who delivers a sustained discourse. Thatdiscourse itself builds on elements from the past, affirming and continuing ornegating. Old sacred objects, previously charged up, are recharged with attention,or degraded from their sacredness and expelled from the life of thecommunity; new candidate sacred objects are offered for sanctification. Byreference to texts past and texts future, the intellectual community keeps upthe consciousness of its projects, transcending all particular occasions on whichthey were enacted. Hence the peculiar guiding sacred object—truth, wisdom,sometimes also the activity of seeking or research—as both eternal and embodiedin the flow of time.Life-Trajectories as Interaction Ritual ChainsThe entire macro–social structure, of non-intellectuals as well, is anchored onritual interactions. What we call structure is a shorthand way of describingrepetitive patterns, encounters that people keep coming back to, a recycling of28 • The Skeleton of Theoryrituals. This larger structure has the feel of externality; it seems thing-like,compulsory, resistant to change. This sense of constraint arises in part becausethe major institutions as repetitive networks are based on their distinctive IRs,which have generated emotional commitments to their identifying symbols. Itis characteristic of these intensely produced membership symbols that peoplereify them, treat them as things, as “sacred objects” in Durkheim’s sense.Organizations, states, as well as positions and roles within them, are sacredobjects in just this sense: reified patterns of real-life interaction, cognitivelyraised above the level of the merely enacted, and treated as if they wereself-subsistent entities to which individuals must conform. This symbolic socialstructuring of the world extends even to physical objects by making them intoproperty appropriated under the sanction of social groups.As individuals move through this grid of encounters, they generate theirown histories of ritual participation. We may call this an interaction ritualchain. Each person acquires a personal repertoire of symbols loaded withmembership significance. Depending on the degree of cosmopolitanism andsocial density of the group situations to which they have been exposed, theywill have a symbolic repertoire of varying degrees of abstraction and reification,of different generalized and particularized contents. This constitutes theircultural capital (CC).4And they will have, at any point in time, a level of emotional energy (EE),by which I mean the kind of strength that comes from participating successfullyin an interaction ritual. It is a continuum, ranging from a high end ofconfidence, enthusiasm, good self-feelings; through a middle range of lesseremotional intensity; on down to a low end of depression, lack of initiative,and negative self-feelings. Emotional energy is long-term, to be distinguishedfrom the transient, dramatically disruptive outbursts (fear, joy, anger, etc.)which are more conventionally what we mean by “emotions.”5 Emotionalenergy is the most important kind of emotion for its effects on IR chains. Itfluctuates depending on recent social experience: intense ritual participationelevates emotional energy, rejection from ritual membership lowers it; dominatinga group situation raises emotional energy, being dominated lowers it;membership rituals within a high-ranking group give high amounts of emotionalenergy, membership rituals within a low-ranking group give modestemotional energy.An individual’s trajectory of action at any given moment depends on wherethat person is situated in relation to the local social structure, the networks inwhich one participates. From the individual’s point of view, this is his or heropportunity structure. From the point of view of understanding the whole setof individuals, we need to know what the whole network looks like: Howmany other persons does each one have contact with, and how is each matchedCoalitions in the Mind • 29up with the others in cultural and emotional resources for carrying out IRs?How far is the network connected via intermediaries, and where is it brokeninto separate networks? Individuals are motivated to participate in rituals ofhighest solidarity, gravitating toward those encounters in which their repertoireof symbols and their level of emotions mesh with those of other persons so asto generate high degrees of solidarity, and away from those encounters in whichthey are subordinated or excluded. If the network is stratified, one attempts ifpossible to dominate one’s ritual interactions; lacking the resources to do this,one attempts if possible to evade rituals in which one is subordinated.In all this there are structural constraints. Where there exists competitionfor membership in egalitarian rituals, some individuals dominate attentionbecause of their relatively higher CC and EE, while others are less attended tobecause they lack these resources. In groups stratified by property or coercivepower, the constraints are even sharper; there is a limited amount of structuralspace in the ruling coalition, and there may be severe limits on the ability ofthe powerless to withdraw from being coerced. For intellectuals, there is aspecial kind of limitation on how much space there is at the top of the hierarchyof ritual attention, which I shall discuss presently as the “law of small numbers.”In all these respects, the local macro-structure determines which ritualencounters will be relatively most attractive or unattractive to a given individual,and hence how that person will channel his or her cultural capital andemotional energy. It is possible that the whole structure might reach equilibrium,a point at which every individual has found the best solidarity payoffpossible under the circumstances. More common is a constantly shifting roundof negotiations from one encounter to another, like eddies propagated acrossa pond fed by many streams.The model of IR chains may be extended inward, toward the intimatelandscape of how individuals talk and think, moment by moment. We willreturn to this promise of a sociology of thinking. Since it is the thoughts ofintellectuals that we are most concerned about, let us first take the variouscomponents of the IR chain—cultural capital, emotional energy, stratifiednetwork structures—and see how they apply to intellectual communities.Intellectuals’ Cultural CapitalConsider now the trajectory of an individual’s career across the intellectualmilieu as an IR chain. The intellectual world is a massive conversation, circulatingcultural capital in intermittent face-to-face rituals as well as in writing.What makes one an intellectual is one’s attraction to this conversation: toparticipate in the talk of its “hot center,” where the ideas have the greatestsacredness, and if possible to attach one’s own identity to such ideas so that30 • The Skeleton of Theoryone’s ideas are circulated widely through the conversation, and one’s personalreputation with it. The conversation of intellectuals is competitive, an implicitshouldering aside and grasping of one another to get as much into the focusof attention as possible. How does one succeed in this struggle for ritualcentrality? One can make two kinds of claims: “My ideas are new” and “Myideas are important.”Creativity implies new ideas. These circumvent the possibility that otherswill ignore one’s conversational overtures because they have already heardthem before. But ideas cannot be too new, whatever their creativeness. Einsteiniangeneral relativity theory, if plopped down in the midst of the Hellenisticintellectual community, would not make one successful, because the topicwould be too far removed from what is recognizable. Successful ideas must beimportant, and importance is always in relation to the ongoing conversationsof the intellectual community. Ideas are important because of their position inthe scale of intellectual sacred objects. Symbols too have their careers, built upas they circulate in IR chains. New sacred objects may displace old ones, butthe interaction rituals in which new symbols are consecrated use as ingredientsthe older sacred objects to assemble the group and focus its attention. Culturalcapital includes paradigms in the Kuhnian sense, but also it includes the meansof breaking down paradigms and substituting others in their place.What makes some cultural capital worth more than others? At a minimallevel, knowledge of the basic vocabulary of the field, of its concepts, its pastsuccesses, its best-known sacred objects. But this only brings one entry intothe field. To reach a more eminent position, one must be aware of the centerof current discussion, and of the symbolic ingredients that can get one the floor.In the modern sociology of science this is called the research front, but thisterm is a little too specific to a particular kind of innovation-oriented intellectualfield. In many historical periods, the intellectual community is in a scholasticizingmode, worshipping exalted texts from the past which are regardedas containing the completion of all wisdom. Eminence here goes to thosepersons who make themselves the most impressive guardians of the classics.Intellectual creativity comes from combining elements from previous productsof the field. The references found in a paper are a rough indication of thecultural capital it draws upon. Derek Price (1975: 125) has calculated fromcitation patterns that in contemporary natural science, it takes on the average12 “parent papers” to give birth to one “offspring paper.” Turning the structurethe other way, we can say that the most eminent intellectuals are thosewhose papers end up being cited the most; their ideas are “parents” to thegreatest number of “offspring.” Their ideas make it possible for other peopleto make their own statements. Here we encounter a complexity. Our commonsenseimage of a major intellectual, a great scientist, mathematician, or scholar,Coalitions in the Mind • 31is someone who has produced an important discovery: the conception ofPlatonic Ideas, the theory of evolution, the fundamental theorem of the calculus.These are the great accomplishments of the field; without them, therewould be nothing to teach novices or to broadcast for outsiders to admire.Within the intellectual community, however, great truths are most importantif the community is in a scholasticizing mode, turned backwards toward itsown past. When the community is oriented toward innovation, great truthsare not so much an advantage as an obstacle. For if the truth is alreadydiscovered, there is little or nothing for the intellectuals who come afterwardsto do; they can be teachers to the outside world, preservers and interpreters ofthe truth, but not discoverers in their own right.The paradox is that for an intellectual community to be in a great creativeage, it must be both making great discoveries and also overturning them, andnot just once but over and again. The most successful intellectuals tend to bechained together across the generations. This implies that the cultural capitalof each one is built on the accomplishment of his or her predecessors, but alsogoes beyond it in truly major ways. We are not dealing here simply with aKuhnian paradigm, in the sense of an exemplar of successful research. Suchexemplars include cognitive worldviews, which have already answered themajor questions. The work they leave to do, in a host of “offspring papers,”is minor, routine, a matter of adding details to what is already known in thelarge. Such work occupies the middle or lower-middle rungs of the ranking ofintellectual eminence. The cultural capital which consists of having learned apowerful paradigm, then, cannot be the most valuable CC for one’s own futuresuccess.The most important CC is that which facilitates one’s own discoveries.Above all, it locates the intellectual territory on which work can be done. Itdoes not merely solve puzzles but creates them. Fermat’s last theorem, tantalizinglyholding out the claim for a proof, is perhaps a greater source of famethan his more definitive work; and it doubtless will have paid off greatereminence for Fermat than for anyone who eventually solved it. (This seemedto be the case when the problem was finally solved in 1994.) Great intellectualwork is that which creates a large space on which followers can work. Thisimplies that the imperfections of major doctrines are the source of their appeal.But there must be greatness on both sides: great doctrines, great imperfections.One reason why Plato was such a dominant figure in late antiquity is that theambiguities in his doctrine of Ideas led to many elaborations, and even to theformation of divergent schools. His shifting theories of the soul, of immortalityand reincarnation, were one source of his popularity and fruitfulness. Similarly,the Vienna Circle had already run into a major problem as soon as it wasformed in the 1920s; its aggressive emphasis on the verifiability and empirical32 • The Skeleton of Theorygrounding of meaningful statements soon led to difficulties in expounding andverifying its own principles. But although the contradictions were to becomethe object of attack by its opponents, they provided a hidden social strengthof the group, insofar as they gave materials for creative work to many membersof the circle. If Schlick’s original doctrine had proven simple to put intooperation, the problems of philosophy would have immediately dissolved, andthe group would have put itself out of business.Intellectuals do not go looking for contradictions to propagate. They tryto solve problems, not create them. The surface of the intellectual world, thesacred objects it focuses upon, and the structural underpinnings of the intellectualcommunity do not line up symmetrically. Consciously and intentionally,intellectuals are oriented toward what they believe is the truth. They do notwant to undermine their own truths, even though it is socially useful to haveflawed truths which will keep their names alive in subsequent generations ofcreative workers. The crucial cultural capital, then, must be something intowhich intellectuals feel their way. What they learn that makes them eminent isan awareness of not only the great solutions of the past, the ingredients thatthey can put into their own creations, but also where the action next will be.They need to appropriate the puzzles which have the greatest significance forthe future activities of their colleagues. This sense of how to relate to theintellectual field is the most important item of cultural capital individuals takefrom their teachers. This is one reason why there is a link from eminence toeminence in the chains across the generations.Emotional Energy and CreativityEmotional energy is the feature of creativity that most lends itself to psychologicalstudy. Its distribution, however, is socially patterned. We know fromDerek Price’s studies that the most eminent intellectuals—in this case, scientistsof the mid-1900s whose work receives the most citations—are the most prolificpublishers; and they are the individuals who stay in the field the longest, whileothers drop out. This evidence suggests that eminence is largely a matter ofhaving access to a large amount of CC, and turning it over with the greatestrapidity, recombining it into new ideas and discoveries. This would makecreativity a matter of sheer activity, of emotional energy in using culturalcapital. The psychologist Dean Keith Simonton (1984, 1988) has shown thatcreative persons in a variety of fields produce large amounts of work, onlyportions of which receive recognition. Their formula for success seems to beto range widely and try out new combinations of ideas, some of which becomeselected for recognition by the intellectual community.This picture is bolstered by many studies (summary in Collins, 1975:Coalitions in the Mind • 33273–274) which find that creative persons have a strong desire to make theirown judgments; this in turn is typically related to childhood opportunities forindependence and novel experience. Often too there is a period of physical orsocial isolation in which these young persons become introduced to a vicariouscommunity of the mind. Their IR chains become detached from the localcirculation of mundane culture and from its pressures for local conformity.The lowering of ritual density is a prerequisite for innovation; but it must alsobe linked to the intermittent support of the rituals of intellectual communitiesto give it content and energy. Such a career pattern from childhood onwardshows the successive development of energies directed at independence andinnovation; for some people this energy channels into the networks of anintellectual field, whereupon it is transformed upward or downward dependingon the structural opportunities available.“Emotional energy” describes well the surge of creative impulse that comesupon intellectuals or artists when they are doing their best work. It enablesthem to achieve intense periods of concentration, and charges them with thephysical strength to work long periods of time. It is this feeling of creativeideas seeming to flow spontaneously that the Greeks attributed mythologicallyto visitations of the Muses or daimones.Emotional energy alone is not enough: in the absence of sufficient culturalcapital and related network position in an intellectual community, creativeenthusiasm is more likely a prelude to frustrated ambitions and failure ofrecognition. Conversely, one might have the CC but lack the EE in thatsituation to be able to use it. This is apparent in more mundane situations, inconversations when one is unable to think of what one wanted to say, only tohave it come rushing to mind after one has left the scene. This is what Rousseaucalled “l’esprit d’escalier,” the clever remark that comes too late, when one isalready descending the stairs. This happens because the power situation in theimmediate interaction is unfavorable, reducing one’s emotional energy andleaving one unable to have the confidence and initiative to use one’s culturalcapital to good social effect. This shortage of focused energy afflicts intellectualsin the form of writer’s block. Here too the flow of energy comes fromone’s sense of where the opportunities are for forming favorable social alliances(in this case vicarious ones), and where these opportunities are blocked.6The emotional energy specific to creative intellectual fields is not the sameas the confidence and aggressiveness of persons in other arenas of social life.It is not the same as the emotional energy of the successful politician or thefinancial entrepreneur, of the sociability star or the sexual hotshot. Each ofthese is specific to a particular kind of social market, where the opportunitiesare especially good for certain people’s particular kinds of cultural capital andemotional energy. There are distinctive kinds of cultural capital and hence of34 • The Skeleton of Theoryrelated emotional energy for intellectual networks; and there are further specificitiesamong fields, so that conditions that make persons creative in geologywill usually serve them little in literature or mathematics or music.In the general model of IR chains, EE goes up or down depending on one’simmediate and recent experiences in interactions. This applies to intellectualsas well. If intellectual life is constructed by rituals in which speakers becomecenters of attention, and in which ideas and texts symbolize the continuity ofan intellectual community across time, we can expect that individuals’ intellectualEE will be driven upward or downward by their type of contact withthese situations and sacred objects. The crucial variable is how closely one isdrawn into participation in these symbolic activities. The speaker at the seminarincreases his or her emotional energy if the audience is responsive; so dothe listeners, if they have the personal cultural capital, and the trajectory oftheir own intellectual projects, that makes their ideas mesh well with the linebeing expounded. In the opposite direction, the inability to carry off the lecturefor that audience, or the inability to follow it, perhaps even the sense of havingone’s ideas excluded, depresses one’s EE. One’s personal level of EE is like areservoir filled up or drained by the amount of experience one has with suchfavorable or unfavorable situations, and by the balance between the two.Flows of EE are cumulative over long as well as short periods of time. Sincepossessing high emotional energy is one of the things that enables a person toattract attention in a ritual interaction, and which affects creativity in general,there is a tendency for persons who are already well started in EE to becomeeven more “energy-rich” over time. A high level of energy reaches a plateauor goes into a reversal if one’s career trajectory takes one into levels ofcompetition for attention in which one becomes overmatched. This occurswhen someone who has become famous within a particular research specialtyis propelled into a larger arena, perhaps interdisciplinary or in the eye of thewider public, where one may not have the resources to match up with theexisting competition. The effect of starting with low levels of EE is likely tobe even more emphatically cumulative. Just as success breeds the ingredientsof success, failure breeds intellectual failure. Depression, writer’s block, theshifting of one’s attention away from intellectual projects and back onto theeveryday world: these are typical pathways by which would-be intellectualsfail to make a mark and drop out of the field. The majority of the intellectualfield at any time consists of persons who are in this transient position.The core experiences of intellectuals are their immediate interactions withother intellectuals. EE is also affected by vicarious experience of the intellectualcommunity. Since words, ideas, and texts are loaded with connotations ofmembership in different segments of intellectual communities, the experienceof reading, even of thinking about intellectual topics, also affects one’s emo-Coalitions in the Mind • 35tional energies. Reading and thinking are vicarious interaction rituals to theextent that an individual can take part in them, and thus can affect his or herlevel of emotional energy. This is true also for the experience of writing. Writingis a vicarious participation in the world of symbolic memberships: insofar asone is able to work out a satisfactory relationship among ideas, one is creatingsocial coalitions including oneself. Successful writing builds up emotional energy.Even over a very short-run period of minutes or hours at one’s desk, theprocess of writing can be a self-enhancing emotional flow.High levels of creativity become crystallized in symbols, and in that formcan circulate through the intellectual field, energizing whoever can most closelyattach oneself to them. When a group has a high degree of agreement on theideas put forward by some intellectual leader, that person becomes a sacredobject for the group. Thus arise the cult figures of intellectual life: Confucius,Aristotle, Hegel, Marx, Wittgenstein. Such personalities, or even their names,become a shorthand for a whole system of ideas. Since intellectuals are highlyaware of the cult heroes of the past, and must take some stance toward theincipient or established heroes of the present, the question arises within eachintellectual’s mind: Can I myself become one of these heroes, perhaps achieveeponymous fame after death? The motivation to make oneself a sacred objectis an energizing force of intellectual careers. One of the reasons why there tendsto be a chain from one highly creative intellectual to another is that the youngerperson draws energy from the older as just such a symbolic hero. It is notmerely a matter of transmitting cultural capital from one generation to thenext, since we are dealing here with creative departures rather than loyaldiscipleship. The protégé’s consciousness is filled by the image of what it is tobe an intellectual hero, by an ideal to emulate, even while one challenges thecontent of the master’s ideas.The flow of emotional energy helps explain a curious point which oftencomes up in creative lives. Persons who later become eminent are frequentlylinked together much earlier in their lives. Hegel and Schelling were schoolmatesat Tübingen, along with the future poet Hölderlin, well before any ofthem had done anything to merit intellectual eminence. But the group alreadywas beginning to generate a certain charisma. They engaged in intense intellectualdiscussions, the archetypal intellectual ritual. Some of their activitieswere explicitly ritualistic, such as an enthusiastic celebration of the FrenchRevolution (Kaufmann, 1966: 8). These ritual interactions were accumulatingemotional energy in advance of a specific creative direction. The cultural capitalwhich gave shape to their EE came as the group encountered Fichte, who wasalready in contact with Kant and had begun to carry out the Idealist revolutionin philosophy. It seems likely that it was precisely their emotional quality, theirenthusiasm, that attracted Fichte, just then entering his first success, to travel36 • The Skeleton of Theoryacross Germany in 1795 to meet with them. As the members of the groupopened niches in the intellectual attention space, the success of one helped pullthe others along. Among the former schoolmates, Schelling achieved creativefame first, with his Philosophy of Nature in 1797. He then used his influenceto get Hegel a position at Jena, the hot center of the Idealist movement, andaccess to publishers. It was in trying to keep up with his old comrade thatHegel struggled to find his own niche in the intellectual world, finally breakingthrough in 1806 with The Phenomenology of Spirit, and in the process splittingwith his old friend to take up different spaces in the intellectual world.There are numerous other instances of this early, formative group structurein intellectual careers.7 One gets the impression of a group, starting with theingredients of talented young individuals and their available cultural resources,building up emotional energy through their intense intellectual interactions.The emotional energy at this time is free-floating; it can go in different directions,depending on how opportunities arise. As these individuals later worktheir way into specific intellectual networks, their energy turns to creativity.Looking back on them retrospectively, we identify them by their later products:we see them as incipient philosophers, novelists, poets, whatever the opportunitystructure turns them out to be.The Opportunity StructureMoment by moment and situation by situation, each person is moving througha continuum of interaction rituals, real or vicarious, ranging from minimal tohigh intensity, which bring in a flow of cultural capital and calibrate theiremotional energy up or down. These local situations are embedded in a largerstructure: in this case the whole intellectual community, spreading as far as thenetworks happen to extend in that historical period. What cultural capitalflows to any one individual depends on where that individual is located andwhat is nearby. Emotional energy fluctuates by local success or failure ininteraction rituals, and that too depends on something beyond the individual,namely, the way one’s own cultural capital and emotional energy matches upwith that of the other persons with whom one comes into contact. Opportunitiesfor solidarity or rivalry, and for being near the hot center or off on thedim periphery, are apportioned within the network as a whole. Cultural capitalflows around these networks, benefiting most those persons who have accessto it while it is still new. Emotional energy also flows around the networks,collecting in intense pools here and there, but ebbing away at times becauseof shifts in the attention space which may be far beyond the province of theindividuals affected by it.What any individual will do at any moment in time depends on localCoalitions in the Mind • 37processes; but what flows into these local situations comes from farther away.Micro-action is affected by the macro-structure. The sheer numbers of personsin the field and the shape of their network connections is the macro-contextwithin which any micro-situation is negotiated. A sociological theory can movein three directions from this point. (1) We can ask a still more macro-question:What larger social conditions determine whether intellectual networks willexist at all? This directs us to the macro-foundations of networks in political,religious, and educational organization. (2) We can concentrate on the shapeof the network structure itself and its dynamics over time; this leads us toconsiderations of the internal stratification of intellectual networks, and to theprinciple of change through structural rivalry that I call the law of smallnumbers. (3) We can dig more deeply into the micro-level and ask how theindividual reacts to being in various positions within a network.The first question will occupy us in later chapters. Let us consider thesecond and third here.Whatever the mode of eminence, some individuals always have more accessthan others to the cultural capital out of which it is produced. This does notdepend on the characteristics of individuals. The opportunity structure focusesattention on some portions of the field and leaves others in the shadows.Cultural capital is apportioned around an attention space; the more valuableCC is that which can be used most successfully in the next round of competitionfor attention.Imagine a large number of people spread out across an open plain—somethinglike a landscape by Salvador Dalí or Giorgio de Chirico. Each one isshouting, “Listen to me!” This is the intellectual attention space. Why wouldanyone listen to anyone else? What strategy will get the most listeners? Twoways will work.A person can pick a quarrel with someone else, contradicting what theother is saying. That will gain an audience of at least one; and if the argumentis loud enough, it might attract a crowd. Now, suppose everyone is temptedto try it. Some arguments start first, or have a larger appeal because theycontradict the positions held by several people; and if other persons happen tobe on the same side of the argument, they gather around and provide support.There are first-mover advantages and bandwagon effects. The tribe of attentionseekers, once scattered across the plain, is changed into a few knots of argument.The law of small numbers says that the number of these successful knotsis always about three to six. The attention space is limited; once a fewarguments have partitioned the crowds, attention is withdrawn from those whowould start yet another knot of argument. Much of the pathos of intellectuallife is in the timing of when one advances one’s own argument.The other way these intellectual attention seekers can get someone to listen38 • The Skeleton of Theoryis to find a topic someone else is talking about and agree with it, addingsomething which extends the argument. Not “No, you’re wrong because . . .”but “Yes, and furthermore . . .” This transforms the relationship into teacherand favorite student. The plain full of dispersed egotists becomes clumpedanother way, into lineages of master-pupil chains.It makes no difference whether persons pursue these strategies consciouslyor unconsciously. The outcome is the same either way. Of course one mightreject the whole image as offensive to intellectual values, the pursuit of truthfor its own sake. Very well; let us adopt this pursuit of truth as our startingpoint. Dispersed across an open plain are a number of persons pursuing truth.Why should anyone listen to what any particular individual among them saysis the truth? The problem of forming a truth-recognizing community is exactlythe same as the problem for attention seekers, and the rest follows as before.8The two strategies and their associated social processes, forming argumentsand forming lineages, go on simultaneously. It is because persons are inlineages, learning something from one another, that they have something toargue about; and what cultural capital they thereby possess influences who isattracted to joining the crowd on one side of an argument or another.Consider now that everything that happens on the plain of intellectualattention seekers is experienced as interaction rituals varying from low to highintensity. All persons move toward those IRs in which they get the largestpayoff in emotional energy, and away from those which are an energy drain.Whether they get energy boosts or losses depends on the lineup of CC and EEamong whomever they come into contact with; and those other persons’ CCand EE are affected in turn by their further contacts, and so on throughoutthe network. The structure should be regarded as a constrained market. To theextent that persons have access to one another, they can match up their CCsand EEs to their best advantage as an open bargaining process.9 But the degreeof access is itself variable. Individuals may have only limited contacts and mustbargain for IR participation in an unfavorable matchup of CCs and EEsbecause particular persons are all who happen to be accessible. Here again theshape of the network, and where individuals happen to be within it, determineswhat they can do: what they think, and with what creative energy.The most important network feature which affects the fate of its membersis the stratification of the attention space. Each person is trying to get the bestintellectual status membership he or she can, not only directly but vicariously.Everyone is attracted to thinking high-status ideas as well as associating withhigh-status persons. The problem is that negotiating alliances is a mutualprocess. One side, looking up the status ladder, might wish to make an alliance,while the other side, looking down, is less eager; the successful intellectual maywelcome followers but is unlikely to give them much recognition in return.Coalitions in the Mind • 39The crunch is all the worse because the intellectual field is structured by rivalries.Opposing positions contend over domination, and even within a singleposition there is only a limited amount of attention to be split up among itsproponents.Each intellectual faces a strategic choice. One can go all out, try to be kingof the mountain, which means trying to be alone or nearly alone at the centerof one of the major intellectual positions. Or one might cut one’s losses andaim for a more modest position: as loyal follower of some successful position;perhaps as an ancillary or collaborator to an active research front; perhaps asa specialist in some less recognized but also less competitive topic. Someindividuals may be explicitly aware of these choices. But this process goes onwhether they are aware of it or not. Individuals do not need to be calculatingmachines; they are unlikely to have sufficient information about the wholenetwork in order to make a thorough calculation, and intrinsic limitations oncognitive capabilities narrow the possibilities in any case.10 The flow of culturalcapital and emotional energy in a network structure moves people aroundwhether they like it or not. Initially most intellectuals aim unrealistically high,and are driven down emotionally by the structure. Whether or not someonestarts out to be a follower or a narrow specialist, sometimes those are theopportunities that open up, while grander positions are denied. The flow ofcultural capital is a long-term constraint; one’s emotional energy adjusts toavailable circumstances more rapidly. By the same token, some people happento be swept up into the structures that turn them from nameless ciphers intothe great creative figures of their field.The Totality of Intellectual Rituals and Sacred ObjectsThe intellectual world consists of all the interaction rituals which take placeperiodically across the landscape and of the flow of sacred objects—ideas andtexts—which result from them. To envision the intellectual world this way isdeliberately to challenge our prevailing conceptions of intellectual life, whethercontemporary or historical. When we ourselves formulate “what is happening”in the intellectual world, we invariable impose an image of one or a fewcurrents, typically distorted by partisanship. Intellectual historians may be lesspartisan because of greater distance, but their view remains partial, fittedaround a few patterns and necessarily limited to a manageable number ofnames and themes. But the intellectual world is much bigger than that, andnot so tightly focused. The most detailed evidence we have covers naturalscientists, who make up only part of the intellectual world. In the 1970s therewere approximately 1 million natural scientists publishing in any year and110,000 social scientists (Price, 1986: 234).11 If we go backwards in history,40 • The Skeleton of Theoryor laterally into less active fields, the numbers are smaller, but in every casethe total active intellectual community is much bigger, and more diverse, thanthe simplified pictures that even the most assiduously detailed history presents.And even this is not far enough. Intellectual activity is intermittent. Today thereare more than a million scientists who come in and out of activity every fewyears; the mass of the scientific community is in this intermittent class. Stilllarger is the surrounding fringe of students, would-be intellectuals, vicariousparticipants, intellectuals in transition in or out. This is the reality on whichwe impose our simplifications.Imagine what it would be like to see through walls and even into people’sminds. The social landscape would appear to us flickering with thoughts. Ifone walked everywhere throughout the corridors of a large university, hearinglectures and conversations and the inner conversations that constitute thinking,one’s sensation would be of tremendous variety, even cacophony. There wouldbe plenty of mundane, non-intellectual thoughts: people thinking about tasksthey have to do, ruminating about their friends and enemies, plotting erotic ororganizational politics; bitter obsessive thoughts, perhaps some rehearsing oflines and replaying of jokes, as well as scattered bits of words, phrases, images,the flotsam and jetsam of recent past exchanges of cultural capital. But someof these ideas would be glowing brightly with emotional significance, chargedup by interaction rituals into sacred objects. These are the ideas that act asmagnetic poles in intellectual thinking, that are the focus of the long and seriousattention that is the activity of the intellectual world at its most intense.There will be fewer of these highly charged ideas, but they are disproportionatelyinfluential, magnetically shaping lesser thoughts like iron filingswithin an individual mind, and exerting a pull across many people that makesthem an intellectual group. But even these ideas are of many different sorts:not just in different corridors of the university but on the same hallway, in thesame conversation, and sometimes in the same mind. If we extend the scopeoutward in time and space, the totality of sacred objects, both intense andmild, that makes up the intellectual world is massive: a diversity of thoughtsthat constitutes all the intellectual ploys, factions, specialties, and disciplinesat a given time in history, and a diversity of such diversities when we moveour focus of attention across the years—20, 50, 1,000 years ago and more. Ifwe could come back 50 years in the future, or 250 years, it is a safe bet thata similar structure would be observed, but filled with other contents.My point is not to be ironic, or pessimistic, or relativistic. I can well assumethat many of these thoughts were and are valuable, as experiences worthhaving, even as truths. Many of them deserve to be sacred objects. The totalityof knowledge today resembles Jorge Luis Borges’s circular library, with endlessvolumes on endless shelves, and inhabitants searching for the master catalogueCoalitions in the Mind • 41buried among them written in a code no one can understand. But we can alsothink of it as a magic palace of adventurously winding corridors with treasuresin every room. It suffers only from surfeit, since new and greater treasures arealways to be found.Borges’s image has the alienated tone characteristic of modern intellectuals;but the underlying problem is the inchoate democracy of it all, the lack of amaster key. Much of the intellectual malaise of the early 1900s has thisconservative undertone, a desire for stratification. But in fact democracy andstratification are both present in any active intellectual community. Even in myoptimistic image of the magic castle of ideas, the people who live inside feelthat there are outer and inner chambers—although they do not always knowwhich is which, and they tend to inflate the status of their own chamber, hopingit is one of the inner ones. The whole has a structure which is independent ofthe numbers of people and ideas within it. There is only enough structuralspace for a limited number of inner chambers, no matter how much oneexpands the crowds in the antechambers.What I refer to as the law of small numbers proposes that there is alwaysa small number of rival positions at the forefront of intellectual creativity; thereis no single inner chamber, but there are rarely more than half a dozen. Thisis particularly so in the realm of theory, and hence above all in philosophy.But segmental restructurings are also possible, especially as fields acquireempirical materials (which might include the texts of their own history). Thenthe magic palace can be split into different wings, even detached ones. Eachdiscipline or specialty can have its own inner and outer rings, subject again tothe law of small numbers, a limited democracy at the top, enhanced undersome conditions by a high rate of change and by uncertainty in the fringes overwhere the center really lies.This overall structure is the field of forces within which individuals act andthink. Its structure is responsible for the stable patterns of ideas and of energiesthat make up intellectual routine; and it is when large-scale forces rearrangethe inner chambers, vacating some and consolidating others, that recombinationof ideas and intense flows of emotional energies occur which make up theepisodes of heightened creativity.Stratification within Intellectual CommunitiesThe most thorough data we have on intellectual stratification concern scientificfields. There is good reason to believe that the basic structures are similar inphilosophy and indeed in most of the humanistic (perhaps also the artistic)disciplines.12Productivity is very unequally distributed among scientists. The chances of42 • The Skeleton of Theoryproducing a large number of papers is inversely related to the square of thenumber of producers (Price, 1986: 38, 223); hence the number of scientistswho produce a very large number of papers in vanishingly small. Derek Price(1986: 140) estimates that the degree of stratification is the same in all scientificfields, and has been of the same order since the takeoff of science at the timeof the inception of the British Royal Society in the 1660s.The shape of the community is a sharply narrowing pyramid: if we lookat the population of scientists, the pyramid sits on a wide base of modestproducers; if we look at the population of papers produced by those individuals,it is a pyramid with its nose pushed into the ground and its base to thesky. Of those who publish anything at all, the biggest group (75 percent)produce just one or two papers, adding up to 25 percent of all papers published.About one twentieth of the group publish half of all papers; they produce10 or more papers per lifetime. The top two scientists out of 165 (1.2 percent)produce 50 or more papers, and thus produce one quarter of all the papers.Authors in a particular field are divided into those who are continuouslyactive (continuants) and those who are active only a short time (transients)(Price, 1986: 206–226). The transients are represented by only a quarter of thepapers at any given time, but since they are coming and going every year, thefloating population of transients makes up 75–80 percent of the total populationof scientists. The “normal continuants” who publish fairly often for awhile are 60 percent of the active population in any given year, but about 20percent of the total floating population. And the core group of high producerswho publish every year are 1–2 percent of the total floating population.The levels of stratification among scientists are thus as follows:scientific stars (small absolute numbers)inner core—top producers (1–2 percent of total floating population)outer core (20 percent of floating population)transients—a few publications or one-shot producers (75–80 percent offloating population)audience and would-be recruits (10 to 100  size of floating population)Career levels in the scientific world depend on passing a series of barriers: (1)one’s first publication, which admits one into the scientific community asdistinguished from laypersons (frequently this is the Ph.D. research); (2) one’snext few publications, which put one in the intermediate group of transientsor potential continuants; (3) five years of continuing publication, which putsone in the high-producing elite or core. Total productivity depends mainly onhow long one stays active in research. Members of this core group (whichmakes up 20 percent of those who are active at any one time, but only 1–2Coalitions in the Mind • 43percent of the total floating population) produce 25 percent of all publicationsover their lifetimes.The sheer amount of productivity across the whole community correlateswell with the quality of the papers and the eminence of the individual scientist.We see this in the similar picture of stratification on the citation side. Half ofthe archive is cited in any year. About 75 percent of papers, if cited at all, arecited only once. Transients’ papers are rarely cited, and if so, not very repeatedly(transients produce about 25 percent of the papers and get less than 5–10percent of the citations). At the other end of the spectrum, about 1 out of 400papers (less than 0.25 percent of the total) is cited 20 or more times per year.About 1 percent of papers receive about one third of the citations (Price, 1986:73, 107–108, 230, 234, 261).Notice that the papers are even more stratified than the authors. The highproducers at the core of the field are indeed the most heavily cited; but sincethey produce (as we have seen) 25 percent of all papers, some few of theirpapers must be much more frequently cited than their other papers. Amongthe highest-producing publishers on record are the mathematicians Cayley(with 995 papers), Euler, and Cauchy, and the physicist Kelvin (with 660)(Price, 1986: 44; 1975: 176, 195). Their fame, however, rests on a smallpercentage of their work. This is inevitable if a small number of high producersare going to swamp the field.Thus we arrive at yet a fourth level of stratification: leaders within the core,and indeed core activities among the activities of those leaders. If the totalpopulation is something like 1 million scientists producing 1 million papersper year, even the top 1–2 percent gives 10,000 to 20,000 scientists. They arethe crème but not the crème de la crème. There must be further differentiationamong these, to arrive at the Einsteins and the other heroes one reads aboutin histories of science. Data do not abound for other kinds of intellectuals; butthe situation among scientists surely applies to all.Stratification of Cultural Capital and Emotional EnergyAccess by intellectuals to the core productive cultural capital is limited. Again,we know the most about the limiting structures among natural scientists; thisgives us insight into the kinds of features that stratify any intellectual field.Modern science is competitive and fast-moving; only the first person topublish a discovery gets credit. Hence the tendency for scientists to congregatearound the popular research areas. There is a premium on speed, on gettingout the crucial results before someone else does. Those who are tightly connectedin social networks will have an advantage here. Evidence on informalcommunications, the circulation of pre-publications before formal publication,shows where this informal group is located. Membership in the social core44 • The Skeleton of Theorynetwork is correlated with being highly productive, in part because it facilitatesrapid transmission of cultural capital.Because of the proliferation of papers, if one relies entirely on reading theliterature as an outsider, one is less likely to know where to look. A randomoverview through the literature by journal browsing, or worse yet by indexingand abstracting services (whether in print media or electronically on-line),which overload the channels rather than focusing them, will not lead one tothe key cultural capital to follow up. Again, one needs the advantage of beingintellectually and socially connected to the core.In the research sciences, innovation depends on familiarity with the latestresearch technology (Price, 1986: 237–253). Such knowledge is usually tacitand informal, passed around by personal contact, rather than the subject ofpublished papers. This is another resource monopolized by those close to theactive core of the research community.Do these structures make the modern research sciences more sharply stratifiedin comparison to non-science fields? Large numbers of scientists and areliance on expensive, rapidly changing research technologies force the pace ofintellectual competition. A smaller field, such as philosophy, or indeed any ofthe humanities, does not put such a premium on rapid access to a moving frontof soon-to-be-outdated information or research equipment. Still, the degree ofstratification of cultural capital may be roughly the same, in that the moreslowly moving fields are also less differentiated into specialties; what competitiondoes exist is all focused on the same central claims for intellectualimportance. And here there is a crunch, a limited amount of attention space,which allows only a small number of intellectual positions to be recognized atany one time.These processes affect the cumulation of EE both positively and negatively.At the top, individuals who have good access to cultural capital through theirprevious experience, their mentors, and their participation in core social networkshave high EE. They are enthusiastically attached to their field, workvery hard at exploiting their opportunities, and receive very high rewards inthe form of recognition. They are best able to monitor the level of competition;although they may often have the experience of being forestalled in publicationby a rival (as Hagstrom, 1965, shows), they also are able to beat others muchof the time. They move on an accelerating (or high constant) level of EE. Thisis what gives them the reputation of being “creative” individuals.At the low end there is a population which is transient. I would attributetheir transience to their low EE, and that in turn to the weak structural positionfor access to crucial cultural capital. They appear as “the kind of person” whoalways has troubles—obstacles, distractions, family and financial difficulties—which just seem to keep them from ever getting their work done. This is wherewe find the familiar writer’s block of failing intellectuals, the “dissertationitis”Coalitions in the Mind • 45of advanced graduate students. I interpret their problem as a low level of EEspecific to success in the intellectual field. Emotional energies reflect the distributionof cultural capital and network opportunities in the structure aroundthem. These persons seem to be “Calamity Janes,” because their level of EEfor intellectual production is constantly being drained, leaving them unable torise above non-intellectual obstacles.The intellectual barriers in themselves are considerable. There are severalhurdles to get over; passing the lowest may seem like a big deal when viewedfrom “downstream,” from the outsider’s viewpoint, but individuals with relativelymodest cultural capital and emotional energy are likely to becomedemoralized when they discover there is yet another barrier beyond that, andanother and another. Publishing one article makes one a recognized scientistor scholar, but only by putting one into the large transient community, mostof whom are about to fall back out into inactivity; publishing two or a fewarticles gets one into the outer ring of the intellectually active world. Andpeople publishing at these low levels of productivity tend to be those who arerarely cited (and in many cases not cited at all); hence the hoped-for payoffdoes not materialize. Even after publishing a few papers, the chance of muchrecognition, and much increment to one’s EE, is not great, unless one is alreadylinked into the core networks. Then come the further barriers: publishingseveral papers a year for five years, and finally getting into the top group offamous producers. The last is the killer: for the structure of the intellectualcommunity seems to guarantee that such stars will always exist; but for thevast majority of practicing and would-be scientists and scholars, becoming sucha star is an inaccessible goal. Experiencing these barriers is what causes thehigh level of transience, of dropping out from active research.13 Even forindividuals who make it through to the higher levels of intellectual success,there is a continuing struggle over a narrow competitive space. This motivatesmany even of the best equipped to drop their highest creative aspirations andsettle for a follower role in some intellectual camp. The stratification of EE ismore restrictive than the stratification of CC; it is the former which makes theapex of the intellectual world a narrow pyramid peak.The Sociology of ThinkingSocial structure is everywhere, down to the most micro level. In principle, whowill say what to whom is determined by social processes. And this means thatthere is not only a sociology of conversation but a sociology of thinking. Verbalthinking is internalized conversation. The thinking of intellectuals, whethercreative or routine, is especially accessible to this kind of analysis. That isbecause, unlike most ordinary thoughts, it leaves traces: both immediately, inwriting, and more globally, in the structure of intellectual networks.46 • The Skeleton of TheoryLanguage itself is the product of a pervasive natural ritual. The rudimentaryact of speaking involves the ingredients listed at the outset of this chapter:group assembly, mutual focus, common sentiment; as a result, words arecollective representations, loaded with moral significance. Durkheim stressedthat we recognize sacred objects by the feeling of constraint and externality indealing with them, and the outrage which automatically wells up when theyare violated. This is the way we behave when someone misuses a word, commitsa mispronunciation, or violates the grammar conventional in the group.Words, like any other feature of cultural capital, have a history across IRchains. They are generated (or introduced to new individuals) in some interactionalsituation, and are loaded with the emotional significance correspondingto the degree of solidarity in that particular encounter. Once acquired aspart of one’s repertoire, they become means for negotiating further situations.A word smoothly accepted or awkwardly taken is a way of testing whethersomeone else will participate in further solidarity ritual with oneself; and wordsare attractors or repulsers which move one toward or away from particularencounters.The same applies to other aspects of language besides vocabulary and pronunciation.The coordination of language acts between conversationalists, theirdeepening rhythmic entrainment in a particular occasion of talk, shapes theongoing meaning of verbal gestures from one encounter to the next. Micro-situationalcoordination occurs on several levels: in the mutual anticipation andenactment of a grammatical structure, in the speech acts in which this grammaris socially embedded, in the emotional flows of personal relations, in thecognitive dimension of what is being talked about, in Goffmanian reframings.All these constitute the social action which gives meaning to talk. Language isnot a closed social universe; it can be used to refer to things and to coordinatepractical actions. Whether it does this or not, language works only because itconveys Durkheimian solidarity. This gives a sociological interpretation to thephilosophical distinction between sense and reference (Dummett, 1978: 441–454). The reference of words is their pointing to something outside thatsegment of conversation; the sense of words (and of sentences, of talk ingeneral) is their symbolic connection to social solidarity, that is, to their pasthistories and present usage in interaction ritual chains. Particular acts ofdiscourse may not always have reference; but discourse cannot occur at all ifit does not have an interaction ritual sense.The Predictability of ConversationsIt is because language has social sense (as well as sometimes an externalreference) that conversations are in principle predictable. I say this even thoughChomsky stressed the infinite varieties of sentences that can be spoken andCoalitions in the Mind • 47recognized; and of course there are numerous practical difficulties of being ina position to predict just what people are going to say. Nevertheless, if weknew some general characteristics of any two individuals’ cultural capital,emotional energies, and position within a market of possible interactions, wecould predict many things about what they might say to each other. In situationswhere we are aware of many of these elements (e.g., cocktail partieswith professional associates, and especially those among new acquaintanceswho share nothing but a common occupation), we often find that conversationsare predictably stereotyped. And this is so even though we are usually limitedto knowing only our own ritual ingredients, whereas full predictability wouldrequire us to know those on both sides.In general, conversation is determined as follows. Individuals’ positions insocial markets (their previous success and current opportunities for negotiatingmembership in encounters of different degrees of social ranking) determinehow much they are attracted to, repulsed by, or indifferent to any particularencounter that arises before them. Some combinations of people result inmutual motivation to continue the interaction they had last time; some personsare starved for interaction with others, especially of higher rank; other personsare satiated by interactions and indifferent to persons of lower rank. (I am nottrying to be comprehensive about the structural possibilities here.)The degree of network attraction that individuals feel will determine theirchoice of linguistic acts. They choose the words, phrasing, style of speech thatwill fit with the type of group membership they are attempting to negotiate.Their interlocutor does the same. Out of this negotiation, each person discoversfrom the symbols the other puts forth more about the implied web of groupmemberships that are being enacted. Over the course of the conversation, themembership stakes go up or down, and this changes the momentary motivationof the participants to go on with the conversation, to change its level ofemotional commitment, or to terminate.Conversation is determined as individuals choose their language acts to fittheir market motivations. Each utterance is a ploy, suggesting a group membershipcontext that is being invoked and a level of intimacy on which to havea personal relationship. The hearer sizes up what is being offered, feels somedegree of attraction or repulsion because of prior resources and current marketsituation, and chooses a reply that is the counter-offer in this social negotiation.Utterances are chain-linked via their membership and intimacy implications;knowing an individual’s position in social networks and hence his or hermotivations, we could predict what that person will say next in response toeach prior utterance.I do not mean to imply that people usually engage in conscious deliberation,thinking through membership implications and choosing something from theirrepertoire to fit whatever membership and intimacy they would like to achieve.48 • The Skeleton of TheoryWhen people talk, they are conscious mainly of what they are talking about(i.e., its reference) and only subliminally of the social motivations that determinewhat they say (i.e., its sense). It is only when people get caught in asituation where they have trouble either going ahead or extricating themselvesthat they become self-conscious, when they deliberately calculate what to sayand what social effect it will have. Some people, of course, may do this quitea lot (uneasy adolescents in sexual negotiations, social climbers, politicians);their special network positions make them more self-conscious than normal.The Predictability of ThinkingThinking is, most centrally, internalized conversation. What we think about isa reflection of what we talk about with other people, and what we communicatewith them about on paper. Combining this premise with the theory ofemotional energy generated by interaction, we may say that what someonethinks about is determined by the intensity of recent experience in IRs, and bythe interactions which one anticipates most immediately for the future.Thinking is driven by the emotional loadings of symbols charged up by thedynamics of the markets for social membership. One’s emotional energy at anygiven moment selects the symbols which give one an optimal sense of groupmembership. Thinking is a fantasy play of membership inside one’s own mind.It is a maneuvering for the best symbolic payoff one can get, using energiesderived from recent social interactions and anticipations of future encounters.Symbols are charged up with an intensity dependent on the degree of emotionalsolidarity actually occurring in a ritual situation. For this reason, immediatelyafter a very intense ritual participation, one’s mind remains full of impellingthoughts, symbols left over from that situation which hang with great force inone’s consciousness. An exciting game leaves the crowd buzzing with a compulsionto talk about it for hours thereafter, and in the absence of real conversations,to think it over inside their heads. The same is true of a powerfulpolitical speech, an emotional religious service, or, on a more intimate level, aconversation which significantly shifts one’s emotional energies.A similar constraint comes from anticipated interactions. When one knowsthat certain kinds of encounters are coming up, the thoughts appropriate tothe social relationships one wishes to negotiate—that is, the contents thatwould be called up by one’s market motivation in that situation—come floodinginto one’s thoughts. A hypothesis: the more intense the motivationalsignificance of an anticipated encounter, the more one’s thoughts are filled byan imaginative rehearsal of the anticipated conversation. One is not usuallyconscious of this rehearsal as such; these contents are simply what one thinksabout.To catch the force of this social causality, let us imagine constructing anCoalitions in the Mind • 49artificial intelligence (AI) that will think like a human. Instead of filling it withprograms for information processing, we start from the outside in. Its keyability would to be carry out interaction rituals. Our sociological AI (let uscall it an IR-AI) must be equipped with rudimentary ability to focus attentionand share common emotional moods, then to store the results of each highlyfocused interaction as markers of social membership. Such an AI would haveto be more than a computer with a monitor and keyboard; it must have a kindof body, capable of recognizing and producing emotions. The most naturalway to do this is to give it an electronic ear and a voice box, capable of tuningin the rhythmic patterns of human speech and imitating them. Initially, then,our IR-AI would carry out IRs on the most rudimentary level, by synchronizingvoice rhythms with its conversational partner. The focus of attention in the IRwould simply be the vocal coordination itself; the content of those patternswhere rhythmic resonance was best achieved would be stored as symbols ofthat moment of social solidarity. Such an IR-AI might well be conceived of asa baby, cooing rhythmically in interaction with its human parents.14The aim is for the baby IR-AI to build up a conversational repertoire,following the ritualistic coordination of conversational turn taking. Its capacityto speak, its verbal repertoire, would be not programmed in but built upthrough its history of IRs. Our IR-AI would store speech patterns in memory,each ranked in order of its EE loading, a quantity varying with the intensityof rhythmic coordination in interaction. This would be its cultural capital. Justas in real humans and their IRs, the EE loading of symbols is greatest at themoment when the IR is taking place, then gradually fades away over succeedingdays and weeks if it is not reused in another successful IR. Memories not taggedby ongoing social emotions fade out.Follow our thought experiment to the point at which our IR-AI is capableof full-fledged conversation. The leap to thinking is simply to put the IR-AI inprivacy, away from human contacts, and have it carry out conversations withitself. It is programmed to search its memory for partners it has recentlyconversed with, pulling out those with the highest EE rating by virtue ofsuccessful rhythmic coordination in those conversations. It searches throughits repertoire of cultural capital for those topics that brought the best EEpayoff, and uses them to construct the utterances of an internal conversation.Such an IR-AI would be completely open. What conversations it makeswith other people, and what inner conversation it has as its thinking, can fillany of the huge variety which is human discourse. What it talks about andhence what it thinks about will depend on whom it interacts with. For it tobecome a philosopher, it must converse with philosophers; to become a sociologist,it must converse with sociologists. How would it become a creativeintellectual of the first rank? In the same way as a human: it would have to50 • The Skeleton of Theorymake network contact in the core circles of the previous generation of creativeintellectuals, becoming introduced to the central lines of argument among rivalgroups. It must catch a sense of the crystallization points in the network playingout the law of small numbers as the focus of the attention space shifts. It woulddo this not by some form of super-sophisticated calculation of network positions,but by being part of the network, attuned through the shifting levels ofEE in the items of CC that make up its flow of conversations. Our sociologicalartificial intelligence creates by constructing a new conversation that combinesthe cultural capital of several groups so as to maximize the EE level of each,uniting the separate conversational rituals into one intensely focused ritualcommanding the attention of the network. It creates by making a new coalitionin the mind.The Inner Lives of IntellectualsIntellectual life, like everything else, takes place in a series of embedded levels.Start at the center with a human body charged with emotions and consciousness.Around him or her is the intellectual network and its dynamics, themarket opportunities for ideas which open up at particular times. Creativitycomes to those individuals optimally positioned to take advantage of theseopportunities. Since the situation is competitive, those who have the firstchances acquire an entrenched advantage in creative eminence; others areconstrained to become followers, or rivals taking the opposite tack from thosealready taken by the leaders. Some who come too late remain challengers whoare squeezed out by the structure.Surrounding the micro-core is the organizational base which makes it possiblefor intellectual networks to exist. The universities, publishers, churches,regal patrons, and other suppliers of material resources set the numbers ofcompetitors in intellectual careers. Their organizational dynamics affect theunderlying shape of the intellectual field; especially fateful are times of crisis,which rearrange career channels and provoke the reorganization of the attentionspace that underlies the epochs of greatest creativity.Finally, there is the largest structure, the political and economic forceswhich feed these organizations. This outermost level of macro-causality doesnot so much directly determine the kinds of ideas created as give an impetusfor stability or change in the organizations which support intellectual careers,and this molds in turn the networks within them.At the center of these circles lies the creative experience: Hegel at his deskon the night of October 12, 1806, struggling to finish his Phenomenology ofSpirit while the battle of Jena booms in the background. The intellectual alone,reading or writing: but he or she is not mentally alone. His or her ideas areCoalitions in the Mind • 51loaded with social significance because they symbolize membership in existingand prospective coalitions in the intellectual network. New ideas are createdas combinations or reframings of old ones; the intellectual’s creative intuitionsare feelings about what groups these ideas are appealing to and which intellectualantagonists are being opposed. The network structure of the intellectualworld is transposed into the creative individual’s mind. Creative flashes are theemotional energy that comes from imaginary interaction rituals.Thinking is a conversation with imaginary audiences.15 In the case of thecreative intellectual, this is not just any imagined audience (like the Meadian“generalized other” in its most abstract sense). High degrees of intellectualcreativity come from realistically invoking existing or prospective intellectualaudiences, offering what the marketplace for ideas will find most in demand.This requires that the individual creator must know his or her audience well,through reading and above all through face-to-face contacts which ramify intothe crucial junctures of the network. Successful interaction rituals bring increasesin emotional energy, deriving from a favorable balance of resourcesvis-à-vis one’s interlocutors: possessing the cultural capital that makes oneaccepted as a member of the group, and above all cultural capital which enablesone to capture the center of attention within it. Creative intellectuals experiencesuch interaction rituals inside their head. The emotional energy of success inthese imaginary rituals is what constitutes creative energy: the capacity forsustained concentration, the sensation of being pulled along by the attractionof a flow of ideas. If the process is often accompanied by a feeling of exultation,it is because these are not merely any ideas but ideas that feel successful.This does not mean that intellectuals must be self-conscious about whomtheir ideals will appeal to. They need not think about thought collectives atall; they can concentrate entirely on the reference of their thoughts—in philosophy,mathematics, sociology, whatever—and try to work out the ideas thatseem to them best. The social sense of their ideas is present nevertheless, andit is this that guides them in constructing new idea combinations. Creativeenthusiasm is nothing but the emotional energy specific to intellectuals whoare in those crucial network positions where they have the cultural capital thatwill appeal to key audiences. It is the emotional side of anticipating how theintellectual community will restructure itself into new coalitions, using one’sidea creations as new emblems of membership. To speak in Mead’s idiom,intellectual creators have their generalized others lodged most firmly in the coreof the intellectual community; their own thinking is an implicit conversationwhich reaffirms the existence of the concerns of other intellectuals. The creativeintellectual, in playing with different ideas, is playing with different restructuringsof the intellectual community, producing a new generalized other withinhis or her mind, in confidence that the intellectual network will reorganize itselfaround these ideas.52 • The Skeleton of TheoryThe external reference of ideas may also exist; I do not wish to denywhatever reality contents intellectual ideas may have, in addition to their socialmembership sense. (How could I, without undercutting the truth of my ownideas?) Human thought is double-sided. A thinker simultaneously finds the bestpath available through all these constraints and attractions. Ideas leap to one’smind and arrange themselves into arguments which represent the most emotionallyenergizing membership coalition available in one’s network; in thisvery process one works out the best statement of empirical truth, of logicalargument, of conceptual adequacy one can. The social construction of ideas ismuch deeper than a simple dichotomy between logic and evidence on one sideand social constraints on the other. We shall see that logic is deeply social, animplicit reflection on the history of the intellectual operations themselves.In the bulk of this book, as we examine the history of intellectual networks,we generally find that intimate materials on the micro-level of the sociology ofthinking are not available; our telescope simply does not resolve to a fineenough focus. What we glimpse, at best, are the long-term contours of interactionalchains and their products, the ideas which are famous because theyhave been carried along in the ongoing terms of argument. The weak resolutionof the telescope makes it easy to slip back into reifying personalities, the personalnames treated as noun substances who are the normal topics of intellectualhistoriography. But even where we necessarily peer at the past through adarkened lens, let us keep reminding ourselves to think analytically about thereality that once was these human lives: the flow of micro-situations that is thetopic of our story.There is a social causation of creativity, even at its intimate core—the contentsof the new ideas that flash into the minds of intellectuals in their creativemoments. The flux of interaction ritual chains determines not merely who willbe creative and when, but what their creations will be.