CHAPTER 10£Cross-Breeding Networks andRapid-Discovery ScienceIn comparison to what went before, modern European philosophy comes onwith a bang. Creativity revives in many directions, beginning around 1600,and is sustained for generations. Not least is the core of abstract philosophyitself. There is a takeoff in epistemology, which becomes much more thoroughand central than in any previous philosophical community. Metaphysics toohas a surprising rebirth, often spurred by the new epistemology. Value theoryflourishes along aggressive new paths in aesthetics, ethics, and political philosophy.All this happened with an explicitly innovative consciousness thatcontrasts with the surreptitious character of creativity in most earlier epochs.In addition, and most spectacularly, there is the scientific revolution of thesame period. This overlaps with the networks of philosophers, especially in itsformative generations. Henceforward science becomes a key reference point,whether positive or negative, for philosophers. Science rearranges the rest ofintellectual space.Why all this innovation? Our general theory holds that creativity resultswhen intellectual networks reorganize, and this happens in opposing factionssimultaneously. We expect not a uniform zeitgeist but a changing array ofoppositions. In the two-step flow of causality, network reorganization is drivenby institutional changes in the material bases of intellectual life. In this revolutionaryperiod, there are two major structural changes:1. Specialized branches of the intellectual networks concerned with naturalisticknowledge suddenly attract wide attention, then gradually separate offinto a distinctive form of intellectual organization, leaving behind a sparer butmore clearly delineated activity of philosophy. This is conventionally called thescientific revolution, but it will need considerable unpacking. There is a doublerevolution, a takeoff in mathematics as well as in science, with the mathematicsrevolution building up several generations earlier. In what does this doublerevolution consist as a social reorganization of intellectual practice? It is notsimply a new focus on knowledge of nature, nor a heightened intensity of em-523piricism, nor even experimentation per se, as historical comparisons will show.The social change in the intellectual world consists in focusing attention on arapidly moving research front; and this in turn comes from technologizing theresearch front. The key here is not so much the material research equipmentas, more broadly, the invention of technique, first in mathematics, then inempirical research. The new technique consists in procedures which can bemanipulated to produce new discoveries at the same time that it makes resultsrepeatable and hence exportable in standardized forms to other locations. It isa machinery for making discoveries, a machinery that breeds and cross-breedsinto new techniques which further accelerate the speed of innovation. A networkof techniques and machines now comes into symbiosis with the intergenerationalnetwork of human intellectuals. Here is a genuine revolution inthe inner organization of the intellectual world, overthrowing the law of smallnumbers which keeps the philosophical community fractionated. There nowappears an alternative organization focused on rapid discovery which leaves atrail of consensus behind.2. There is another, very different structural change in the bases of intellectuallife: displacement of the church from control of the central means ofintellectual production. Secularization is long-term and goes through manytwists and turns. It is by no means reducible to the Protestant Reformation; ithad already begun with the courtiers and lay officials of the late Middle Ages.Through the mid-1600s its intellectual center of gravity was the politics of theCatholic Church under the Spanish and French monarchies, the matrix for asurge of Catholic religious movements—Jesuits, Jansenists, Oratorians—whoseintersection undergirds the new networks. Political maneuver among rivalCatholic states, and the convoluted diplomacy of the religious wars, opens upa new space for Jews and religious cosmopolitans, for Deists, and for outrightcynics and secularizers. The Protestants are more theologically particularistic;their philosophical developments hinge on contact with the cosmopolitannetwork to the Catholic side. The most significant philosophies in the Protestantlands come later, with the stalemate of religious mobilization and theemergence of toleration. Still later is yet another wave of institutional secularization.In Chapter 11 I examine the struggle to secularize the educationalsystem inherited from the medieval church. This is the university revolution,set off in Germany around 1800 and gradually adopted in all the other leadingschool systems. There are many stages of intellectual reorganization in responseto these changes in the religious-secular base; the alliances, halfway houses,militancies, reactions, and recombinations of positions drive much of thephilosophical creativity from 1600 through the early 1900s.These two structural changes—the revolution in math and science andsecularization—are analytically distinct. Secularization represents a long-termshift in the organizational power of the church, and is not fundamentally524 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscaused by science or any other novel rationality. Nor is science the ideologyof the Reformation, or indeed of the secularizers. We must beware of adoptingProtestant propaganda, or of projecting the alignment of secularizers andscientizers which would predominate in the 1800s back into the intellectualpolitics of earlier generations. The connection between the two great changesis structural: the organizational breakdown of the church led theological intellectualson all sides to seek new alliances, energizing conflicts in astronomyand mathematics and endowing them with general significance. For a time,competition over technical innovation became a main focus of intellectualattention. As techniques of rapid discovery built up, the newly prestigefulmathematics and science became resources taken up by virtually all the factionsstruggling over the shifting power base of the church.One consequence of secularizing the means of intellectual production is thatphilosophy entered the political arena as an independent actor. Courts hadbeen a source of intellectual patronage, alongside the church, throughout muchof history. What was new is that intellectuals were no longer merely praisingtheir patrons but shaping a new intellectual and political turf. One result wasthat the intellectual network became the base of political factions in its ownright; we have here not merely political ideologies but intellectualized ideologies.Another result happened within the inward focus of the intellectualnetworks: the topics of political concern became new pieces of the intellectualattention space and were turned into specialized disciplines. Thus arose thesocial sciences, further subdividing the old philosophical networks.It is conventional to begin this history with Hobbes and Locke, but thepattern first becomes visible in the Catholic sphere, with Vitoria, Suarez, andthe Spanish liberals who created international law. Modern political philosophyemerged from the power relations of Church and state. Before it becamesecularized, the turf was carved out on issues such as the reunification of thechurch and the pacification of Europe, the subject of schemes ranging fromBruno and Campanella to Leibniz. As the church became institutionally displaced,political philosophies turned secular; every philosophical turn, includingIdealism and Utilitarianism, was pressed into duty. The lineage passesdirectly from the German universities training theologians for the Prussian statechurch, to the state-conquering movement of Marxian socialists. At the sametime, the structure of intellectual space is freed up for new disciplines. As wesee in Figures 10.1 through 14.2, the retroactive founders of virtually everysocial science, from Hobbes and Smith to Comte and Wundt, Freud andDurkheim, branch off from the main philosophical networks.All three institutional patterns—science, secularization, social sciences—give some grounds for interpreting philosophy as dying. For almost 400 years,one or another faction in the intellectual wars has declared philosophy to benothing more than embryonic science, whether natural or social, perhaps withCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 525a residue of outworn religious beliefs. What needs emphasis is that philosophysince 1600 has been as creative on its own turf as at any time during worldhistory. The conditions which produced the ideology of the death of philosophyhave given philosophy new materials with which to re-create itself. The generationsfrom 1600 to 1665 believed that their new philosophy, which consistedof natural science, would completely replace the old; yet the last generationof the 1600s saw the greatest outburst of metaphysical system-building incenturies, culminating shortly after 1700 in one of the most extreme idealismsin history, Berkeley’s. The Enlightenment Encyclopedists recapitulated the attackin the more secularizing mode, to be immediately upstaged by the GermanIdealists.Science and secularization rearranged but did not replace a core philosophicalnetwork that had carried down its own concepts and problems from earlierperiods. Metaphysics is not exhausted by theology, nor does it fold withoutoverlap into scientific cosmology. Nor even, despite the claims of politicalintellectuals from Marx’s time to our own, does it disappear into politics.Philosophy is an analytical region which is revealed all the more sharply whenreligious dogmas as well as models of nature are stripped off into specializedsectors of the intellectual world; and this is so whether philosophers think theyare doing metaphysics or science. Epistemology is not part of the core activityof scientists; it is part of philosophers’ turf to argue over the bases of knowledge,however knowledge may be exemplified in a particular period. Thus wefind philosophers of science, such as Bacon and Descartes, who want nothingbetter than to destroy philosophical argument and promote science, but whoseeffect is to make epistemology a creative center for the philosophical field.Splitting off secularized political ideologies and specialized social sciences goesalong with sharpening the focus on value theory inside philosophy, giving itmore autonomous content than it had in the days when it was circumscribedby theological orthodoxy and authoritarian rule. Hence the militancy of variouskinds of modern value theory, from Hegelians, Marxists, and Utilitariansdown to existentialists and postmodernists.The differentiation of specialties from the philosophical networks lays barethe inner terrain of abstract reflexivity which makes up the intellectual field.Philosophy, re-creating its own space in the midst of the others, increasinglybuilds what is distinctively its own.A Cascade of Creative CirclesThe skeletal structure of creativity is its network lineages, and the history ofmodern philosophy can be traced through a surprisingly small number of socialcircles (see Figure 10.1 and its continuation in Figures 11.1, 12.1 and 12.2,526 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFIGURE 10.1. EUROPEAN NETWORK: THE CASCADE OF CIRCLES,1600–173513.1 and 13.2, and 13.8, and 14.1). These are circles in a strong sense: groupswhich regularly meet, in which everyone knows everyone else. In the networkfigures they are designated by an enclosed border within the network. Theyare self-conscious; typically they have a name, as well as allies and oftenenemies on the outside; usually they have a program and issue their manifesto.They are the material core of intellectual movements; in the terminology ofmodern social movement theory, they are SMOs, social movement organizations.They are the nodes at the center of networks, recruiting and publicizingand thereby building waves of creative energy in intellectual attention space.For the time when intellectual life moved outside the church and theuniversities, circles provided the indispensable stage and the backstage machineryof theater. In our two-step model, rearranging the material bases of intellectualproduction makes possible new networks and sets off intellectual realignment.The key circles of modern Europe are those which reorganized themeans of communication; they set up networks of correspondence and createdthe first intellectual periodicals. The intellectual networks of the 1600s werefull of diplomats, refugees, and commercial travelers; in the absence of a postalsystem, they controlled the key resource for organizing a truly cosmopolitannetwork, making possible the meta-circle of circles which emerged in thisperiod. Later in the century the dominant circles arose where they could findnew bases of collective material support: academies which did not depend onindividual patronage relations. Still later such circles captured university positionsor formed out of student groups, although the shift back into theuniversity base usually replaced circles with academic lineages. Groups arisewhere they control a special niche in the means of intellectual production. Eachnew phase in the development of the publications business tends to haveassociated with it a famous intellectual circle. In tracing these circles we aretracing the major episodes in reorganizing the bases of intellectual production.1In 1623 from his monastic cell in Paris, Mersenne formed a circle ofcorrespondence, working closely with Gassendi and connecting to Kepler,Galileo, Campanella, Descartes, Hobbes, Torricelli, Fermat, and other mathematiciansand scientific researchers of the time. Mersenne was the organizationalleader; Descartes emerged as the intellectual leader whose works becamethe movement’s emblem and program statement. Mersenne’s circle lasted until1648; in 1657 its survivors began regular meetings at the houses of wealthypatrons, Montmor and the Cartesian leader Rohault. This circle too served asa clearing house of letters announcing scientific and mathematical discoveries,and it made available Descartes’s unpublished manuscripts to Malebranche andLeibniz.2 Another temporary visitor was Leibniz himself, who went on toorganize the first scientific journal in Germany, Acta Eruditorum, in 1682, andthe academies at Berlin and St. Petersburg; together these provided the basefor much of mathematics in the next century.528 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsOther circles around Paris contemporary with the Mersenne-Cartesiangroup became prominent for the history of philosophy: first the so-calledLibertins Érudits in the 1630s through the 1650s, connected to the court.Immediately after this came the Port-Royal circle of Pascal and Arnauld, from1655 through the early 1660s, during the height of the struggle betweenJansenists and Jesuits.A parallel and to some extent derivative structure emerged in England; ascientific correspondence circle formed in the 1630s around German Protestanttravelers settling at London. This gave rise to the famous Invisible College atOxford in the 1640s during the Commonwealth, from which came Boyle’sfamous scientific experiments in the early 1660s. In 1662 its members formedthe Royal Society in London, whose Transactions became the first scientificperiodical. Meanwhile at Cambridge from 1633 to 1660 was an oppositionalPlatonist circle of Whichcote, Henry More, and Cudworth; Newton was intellectuallyinitiated by its members early in his life, and Locke connects to it too,as well as to the other major circles of his generation.Counting the successor circles across the generations as one, we see six circlesin the great revolutionary period of the mid-1600s: the Platonists and thecosmopolitan scientific movement in England; a similar scientific-philosophicalmovement in Paris, with more extreme tendencies presented by the Port-Royalgroup and the Libertins Érudits. Completing the lineup is the Amsterdamcommunity of religious cosmopolitans (1640–1680s), largely crypto-Jews inexile from Portugal; they connect not only to Spinoza but also to Frenchreligious and anti-religious factions and to cosmopolitan travelers such asLocke. Bayle publicized their views by founding Nouvelles de la Républiquedes Lettres in 1684.In the early 1700s the only notable circles were in London, organizedaround the emerging publishing business: the Whig literary circle of Addisonand Steele and, more important, the Tory literary circle of Pope, Bolingbroke,and Chesterfield. Through Swift the latter circle connected with Berkeley; andits members hosted and inspired the young French visitors Montesquieu andVoltaire in the 1720s.In the mid-1700s Paris had another major circle: the Encyclopedists (1745–1772), whose core was a new kind of publishing enterprise; contact with itinspired Rousseau and the wealthy Helvétius. During the 1770s and 1780s,the group re-formed at Auteuil at the estate of Mme. Helvétius, recruitingCondorcet, Cabanis, and Destutt de Tracy as well as scientific stars such asLavoisier and Laplace. It was especially active after 1792 as a refuge from theRevolutionary period of the Terror. In the late 1790s and early 1800s, manyof the group were in the Chamber of Deputies or the Senate, forming amoderate monarchist–anti-religious faction called the Idéologues. Its protégésincluded Comte and Maine de Biran.Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 529The English counterpart in the late 1700s was a prominent scientific circle,the Birmingham Lunar Society, in contact with the French circles. More importantfor philosophy were the Philosophical Radicals at London (1810–1830), followers of Bentham including James Mill and Ricardo. Institutionallythey controlled the Encyclopedia Brittanica and founded the WestminsterReview and the University of London, the first break for centuries in theOxford-Cambridge monopoly. At Oxford from 1833 to 1841 there was acounterbalancing movement of the religious conservatives: the Tractarians, ledby Newman. London struck back in the next generation with a group ofevolutionists led by Huxley and Spencer and encouraged by John Stuart Mill,flourishing in the 1850s to 1870s. Their institutional bases were the newpolitical-intellectual journals: The Economist, The Leader, and FortnightlyReview, along with the Utilitarian Westminster Review; Spencer found a publishingniche for his work in the form of a personal encyclopedia. NowCambridge philosophy revived, while its most notable thinkers connectedthrough the Society for Psychical Research, founded in 1882. Meanwhile atOxford there was the Idealist movement led by Green. Finally we come to thestudent society known as the “Apostles” at Cambridge, in a burst of glory(1890–1915) with McTaggart, Whitehead, Russell, Moore, Keynes, LyttonStrachey, Leonard Woolf, and Wittgenstein; many of them overlapped with theBloomsbury literary circle around Virginia Woolf and her husband’s publishinghouse.The history of German philosophy is likewise a chain of circles. In themid-1700s the Berlin Academy under the patronage of Frederick the Greatsponsored Euler’s mathematics and offered asylum to Voltaire; it recombinedthe older French network with Leibniz’s lineage. The Berlin network catalyzedGerman intellectual life. From this base Maupertuis interfered in the religiousdisputes of the German universities. A Berlin intellectual circle built up aroundthe bookseller Nicolai; contact with this circle spread the action to Königsbergwith Kant, Hamann, and Herder. What followed went along with the explosionof a literary marketplace in Germany. From 1775 through the 1820s, Goetheassembled a literary group at Weimar, which in the 1780s sponsored Kantiansat the nearby university of Jena; Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel were there in theperiod 1794–1806, while during 1795–1800 the Romantic circle formed atWeimar around the Schlegel brothers, moving in the early 1800s to Berlin,where it connected to Schleiermacher. These two clumps of circles, Berlin-Königsberg and Weimar-Jena, disappeared after the founding of the Universityof Berlin in 1810. About 1837–1842 at Berlin appeared a coffeehouse circlecalling themselves first the Doctors’ Club, subsequently “Die Freien”: thesewere the left-Hegelians following Feuerbach, led by Bauer and Ruge, includingStirner, Bakunin, and the young Engels and Marx. Their house organ was the530 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsHallesche Jahrbücher, succeeded by the Deutsch-Französiche Jahrbücher coeditedby Marx.German philosophy was established within academic chains thereafter, andthere were no more important circles until 1925–1936, when Schlick, Neurath,and Carnap led the Vienna Circle of logical positivists, with its manifestos andits journal, Erkenntnis. In the late 1930s to 1940s in Paris appeared thecounterpoise: the existentialist circle of Sartre, Camus, Merleau-Ponty, deBeauvoir, and the young Lacan, importers of German cultural capital from thephenomenologists and Freudians. Once again the circle has a distinctive baseof publicity: the Gallimard publishing house, with its pioneering mass-distributedbut intellectually elite paperbacks, the avant-garde theater, and politicallymilitant publications, especially Les Temps Moderne.Philosophy in the United States came alive with three circles: in the 1830sand 1840s the Transcendentalists around Boston, led by Emerson and Thoreau;the St. Louis Hegelians of the 1860s and 1870s, who eventually migrated toNew England; and in 1871–1875 the Cambridge Metaphysical Club, whosemembers later to be famous included the young Peirce, William James, andOliver Wendell Holmes. Out of this group came the renowned Harvard philosophydepartment of 1885–1920.In the 11 generations from 1600 to 1965, European thought has beenorganized by some 15 circles: half a dozen circles in the mid-1600s (two ofthem predominantly scientific); the Whig and Tory literary circles of the early1700s; then the three great intergenerational successions: the Encyclopedists-Auteuil-Idéologues in France; in Germany the overlapping circles of Berlin-Königsberg from the 1750s to the 1780s and Weimar-Jena-Romanticists inthe 1780s to 1810, revolving back to Berlin at the end of the period with theYoung Hegelians in the 1830s as the last of this chain. There were a fewanti-modernist religious circles in the anglophone world: the Oxford Tractariansof the 1830s, the New England Transcendentalists in the 1830s and 1840s,the Green-Jowett circle of Idealists at Balliol College, Oxford, the St. LouisHegelians in the 1860s and 1870s, and the Society for Psychical Research inthe 1880s. On the scientific side during the 1800s were the PhilosophicalRadicals and Evolutionists in London, and an offshoot, the Cambridge (Massachusetts)Metaphysical Society, in the 1870s. Finally there were the threegreat centers of the early 1900s: the Cambridge Apostles, the Vienna Circle,and the Paris existentialists.The major and secondary philosophers did not all belong to one or anotherof these circles, but a large proportion did; if not members, virtually all of theimportant philosophers were at least connected to one or more circles.3 Thecircles energized the creativity; like Hobbes and Rousseau, most successfulindividuals made contact with the group first, then were sparked into the in-Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 531tellectual action for which they became famous. This is not to say that themost famous philosophers were typically the organizers of these groups. Studiesof similar intellectual groups in recent fields show that there is usually adivision between an organizational leader who builds the material underpinningsand an intellectual leader who makes its doctrine famous (Mullins, 1973;Griffith and Mullins, 1972). This is a division of labor which describes therelation between Mersenne and Descartes, or between Bauer and Marx. Someof the greatest philosophers are connected to multiple circles, members of none;especially in the late 1600s, we see in such network positions Spinoza, Leibniz,Locke, and Bayle, along with the great freelancing scientists Newton andHuygens. The greatest creativity consists in making new conceptual combinations,playing off the oppositions of existing groups, and laying down newalliances that become institutionalized in the groups of the immediate future.Circles are the accumulators of attention and the resonators of emotionalenergy; the sparks which fly between them are the thoughts of persons situatedat the nodes where the networks intersect.4The question lingers: Why these circles rather than others? There weremany more salons and discussion groups than these eminent 15; academiesexisted in every provincial town in pre-Revolutionary France, just as in thefollowing century students and lecturers gathered for talking as well as drinkingin every Germany university town and in many a British college. Most ofthese groups were patterned on earlier and more famous ones, the pioneerswho located a new intellectual base. Even where the circles were all on thesame footing materially, there was advantage in being the first or nearly firston the scene; where several early networks began to form, the first to acquirea reputation for its arguments could build an accelerating lead, attractingrecruits and pulling away from the others. Whether composed of circles or ofindividuals, the intellectual world is constructed on a limited focus of attention,a space that allows only a small number to be successful.Philosophical Connections of the Scientific RevolutionThe Emergence of Rapid-Discovery ScienceWhy are philosophical networks implicated in scientific creativity? To solvethis problem, we need to answer two related questions. First, what is thedifference between the social organization of science before and after thescientific revolution? And second, what is the sociological difference betweenscience and philosophy?The scientific revolution was not the emergence of science. Observationaland calculational knowledge existed in all of the major world regions before532 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsEurope of the 1600s; that is why it is possible, as we will shortly see, to considerthe overlap or non-overlap between philosophical networks and those of astronomers,mathematicians, or medical scientists in Greece, China, and India.5What did the scientific revolution do to change science as a form of socialorganization? The question need not hinge on asserting the greater validity ofmodern scientific knowledge. Some portions of Chinese or Greek mathematics,biology, or planetary astronomy may be considered sufficiently valid even froma modern European point of view, so here validity is not a distinguishingcharacteristic. Leaving aside these issues about the contents of science, thereare two major social differences.First, European science moved much more rapidly. It focused on a fastmovingresearch front, making and discussing new discoveries for a few yearsand then moving on to something else. European intellectuals became highlyconscious of this movement of rapid discovery. We find it in the explicitscientific ideologies of Francis Bacon, Descartes, and Boyle: the notion that amethod of making discoveries had been found, and that future problems wouldbe rapidly solved. This was not only an ideology; the accumulation of scientificresearch literature did indeed accelerate continuously from this point onward.6We might thus designate science before and after the scientific revolution as“traditional science” and “rapid-discovery science,” respectively.Second, European science acquired a higher degree of consensus. This isnot to say that there were no controversies, but rather scientific controversiesbecame socially resolved over a period of years, and the community of scientistscame to treat old issues as settled while concentrating on new ones. Again,European intellectuals were highly conscious of this characteristic; after 1600they tended to elevate science and mathematics as exemplars of the highestlevel of consensus possible. In general, non-European science had much less ofthis consensus, and little or none of the reputation as exemplar of secureknowledge.This is not to say that there was never social consensus over particularaspects of non-European science. The elementary portions of Greek geometryafter Euclid, for example, were widely accepted among mathematicians. Butthe more sophisticated work of Archimedes, Eratosthenes, and Apollonius wasonly sporadically represented in later textbooks; in the Roman period, Nicomachuswas generally followed but Diophantus was often ignored, and latetexts such as Boethius’ omitted the proofs that constituted the main Greekachievement in abstract mathematics. Greek mathematical practitioners as awhole achieved only a “lazy consensus” largely by neglecting more complexdevelopments. This was even more pronounced in Chinese mathematics; inmany instances sophisticated results and methods were subsequently lost.7There were also widespread and long-standing areas of dissensus in tradi-Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 533tional science. In Greek astronomy the homocentric planetary spheres ofEudoxus (ca. 370 b.c.e.) became prominent; Aristarchus’ heliocentric model(ca. 270 b.c.e.) was not generally accepted. After 300 b.c.e. Babylonian astronomyand astrology were imported, which added two more systems forsolar and lunar predictions, plus a large variety of planetary theories. After150 c.e. Ptolemy’s mathematically sophisticated comprehensive model eventuallybecame the textbook standard, although other models survived for centuries(DSB, 1981: 11:188, 202; Neugebauer, 1957: 115; Jones, 1991). In harmonicsthere were rival theories dating from the Pythagoreans and fromAristotle’s protégé Aristoxenus; Ptolemy proposed an improved model, but therival systems continued, and several were included by Boethius around 530c.e. (DSB, 1981: 11:203). Outside Greece, dissensus in the technical fields ofscience was common.8The emergence of European rapid-discovery science sharpened the differencebetween science and philosophy. Here the crucial difference was theheightened degree of consensus in science. Philosophical controversies tend toremain unresolved, and old positions are typically subject to revival. Rapiddiscoveryscience, however, arrives at agreement, and the older work is eitherincorporated as a partial contribution or regarded as outdated. The contrastbetween philosophy and science first became an explicit item of attention after1600. Descartes and the other ideologists of the new “mechanical philosophy”intended to replace one mode of intellectual life with the other. The fact thatphilosophy survived as a distinctive activity, and indeed that rivalry amongphilosophical positions continued in Descartes’s own day, underscores thepoint that these are two different ways of organizing intellectual communities.Nevertheless, there is similarity and even overlap among scientific andphilosophical networks. In both kinds of networks, creativity clusters in groupsand builds up in intergenerational chains. Consider now the sociological implicationsof scientific consensus for the structural organization of the community.Does this consensus mean that science escapes from the rivalries whichdrive intellectual fields, while philosophy remains stuck in the fractionation ofthree to six active positions which makes up the law of small numbers?In fact science shows both patterns at different phases of the researchprocess. Science is based on rivalries and controversies while a topic is on theresearch forefront. Eventually these controversies are resolved, and the losingpositions are abandoned. At this point the winning position is taken as secureknowledge, while the field goes on to controversy over something else. Theseare Bruno Latour’s (1987) two faces of science: science-in-the-making operateslike philosophy; science-already- made is science after the research front, whenconsensus and cumulation prevail. Science on the research front follows thelaw of small numbers, as scientists struggle by dividing along rival structurings534 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsof the attention space.9 But this is given up in time, primarily because scientistsare more eager to move on to a new research front than they are to stay anddefend losing positions. Thus, in the two ways in which science differs fromphilosophy—eventual consensus and a fast-moving research front—the latteris what makes the difference for the former. Science arrives at social consensusbecause the research front is still moving, and it is easier to make a reputationthere than by clinging to old controversies.What then are the social conditions which brought about this combinationof rapid research front plus consensus on older results? One possibility isempiricism. Many kinds of organized empiricism had developed in Europe bythe 1600s. Dissections at the Padua medical faculty led to Vesalius’s newanatomy in 1543; Tycho Brahe’s observatories in Denmark and Prague produceddetailed astronomical data from 1576 to 1600; by the late 1600s therewas a veritable enthusiasm of private naturalistic collections. But the differencebetween European rapid-discovery science and traditional science is not amatter of empiricism. Traditional science is essentially empirical. We see thelimits of sheer empirical accumulation in the official Chinese astronomicalbureaus, which brought neither rapid discovery nor consensus despite manycenturies of observation; similarly, Albert the Great’s naturalist collection setoff no research front. The collections fashionable among the gentry of the1600s tended toward curious anomalies and did little to develop explanatorytheory (Impey and McGregor, 1985; Girouard, 1978: 163–80). One mayconclude that empiricism by itself does not reach very high levels of intellectualabstraction and systematization, and does so only when naturalistic empiricistsare brought into contact with the competitive intellectual community of philosophers.Philosophy-plus-empiricism does not yield research-front science,but philosophical networks are one of the necessary ingredients.What else is needed? Two other possibilities are research technology andmathematics. Both of these went into accelerated development at the time ofthe scientific revolution. In some respects they are alternatives; some of thescientific takeoff, such as that of Galileo or Boyle, was associated with researchtechnologies; other parts of the takeoff, such as the astronomy of Copernicusand Kepler, were essentially mathematical. At a deeper level, we shall see thatboth research technology and mathematics acquired a similar social organizationat this time.technologizing the research frontRapid-discovery science is not just a network of persons or of ideas; it isthe connection between the human network and a genealogy of research technologies.The research front consists of the most recent edge of those technologies.The scientific revolution coincided with the setting in motion of this tech-Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 535nological front of laboratory equipment and tools of observation and measurement.The chief dynamism of scientific discovery, as Derek Price (1986: 237–253)suggests, is driven by laboratory technology rather than by theories. Thescientific takeoff of the 1600s is exemplified by Galileo’s use of the telescopeto discover new phenomena in astronomy. Galileo adopted or invented technologies:a pendulum for measuring time, lenses for telescope and microscope.His followers invented barometers and thermometers and vacuum pumps.There followed a wave of imitation of Galileo’s method: using new instrumentsto make discoveries. Modifications of the telescope led to the microscope, henceto discoveries in other arenas far removed from Galileo in mechanics andastronomy. The general notion of trying out new apparatus for experimentsled to Galileo’s own work on mechanics using ramps; application of existingpumps led to new instruments and discoveries regarding pressure andtemperature.Technologies evolve by tinkering. Earlier machines are modified, adaptedto new circumstances, combined with other lineages of technology. Hence theymay be conceived of as networks—indeed as genealogies—in their own right;there is a crucial connection from machine to machine, and not merely fromperson to person.10 Technology usually exists in a historical stream of its ownbefore it is picked up by an intellectual network; thus lenses go back toeyeglasses in the 1200s before being adapted to scientific purposes by Galileo’sgeneration, and Boyle and Guericke adopted pumps from mining to scientificexperiment. In the non-intellectual world of practical activity, a technology isnot usually a subject of experimentation and change. When the intellectualnetwork organizes itself around research equipment, however, it begins totinker with the technology in order to generate phenomena which its memberscan use in their arguments, their struggle for attention. Research technology isnot an embodied theory but is embodied accumulated practices; the lab equipmenton the research forefront is an embodiment of the generations of pasttinkering. Scientific theories are the ideologies—the socially negotiated interpretations—which legitimate this genealogy of tinkering.Why should this change philosophy into science? That is, why shouldresearch technology create a fast-moving research front, with agreement behindthe edge of the front? Technology is not necessarily fast-changing when left tothe non-intellectual world;11 it is intellectual competition which speeds it up.How then does research equipment result in resolving intellectual rivalries,overcoming the law of small numbers which prevails in philosophy?Research equipment is easy to monopolize, especially if it is constantlychanging on a fast-moving forefront. Discoveries can be made rather predictablyby tinkering with equipment used in previous discoveries. “Normal sci-536 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsence” consists in making small modifications in existing equipment and observingthe empirical results, or in applying equipment to untouched areas ofobservation. More revolutionary developments can be produced by inventingnew kinds of equipment, usually by analogy, recombination, or reapplicationof older equipment, deliberately cross-breeding equipment genealogies. Thetelescope and microscope opened up new realms in which discoveries weremore or less guaranteed; the invention of the electrical battery in the late 1700sand its application to electrolysis of fluids resulted in the discovery of dozensof chemical elements, just as successive generations of particle accelerators wereresponsible for producing the next round; the shift from optical to radioastronomy widened the range of stellar phenomena, as did the combination ofspectroscopic analysis with optical photography (Price, 1986: 237–253). Whentinkering with the prior generation of research-front equipment becomes normalprocedure, scientists come to expect new discoveries as a matter of routine.The greatest attention goes to whoever is on the research forefront usingthe latest equipment. New discoveries upstage older ones. The result is a socialconsensus once a field stops being an area of hot research news. Scientists giveup competing over older theoretical rivalries so that they can move on to theforefront of the newest, most successful equipment; they abandon old controversiesso they can get into new controversies. Of course not everyone abandonsold positions. Thomas Kuhn argued that proponents of defeated paradigmsnever give up but only die out. It is likely that when the research frontis moving quite rapidly, adherents of older theories just as rapidly lose attention,and stubbornness does them little good. Thus the law of small numbersmay prevail on the forefront itself as it gives way to domination of one positionbehind it, precisely because the lure of working on the forefront is much greaterthan expounding an already known position.There is another way in which research technology produces consensus.When a new technology is tried out, the practical activity of scientific researchconsists in tinkering with it to produce new phenomena, and then furthertinkering until those phenomena can be reliably repeated. This is not an easyor automatic process. It took about 15 years for Boyle’s generation of airpumps to produce consistent results; and today controversies swirl when coldfusion or gravitational waves cannot be routinely evoked (Shapin and Schaffer,1985: 274–276; more generally see Galison, 1987). The equipment—and thetheory—are perfected simultaneously when these effects are routinized, that isto say, when the machinery embodies enough past practices of tinkering sothat one can follow explicit procedures and get expected results. This technicalrepeatability is what makes science seem certain and hence objective.Science is socially constructed, but I would stress that it is constructed notso much by the imposition of ideas upon the world (idealist constructivism) asCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 537by the dominance of physical practices, embodied in material equipment (onemight call this materialist constructivism). It is possible that a different line ofresearch equipment or a different line of tinkering could produce repeatableresults as well; and this might be combined with a different lineage of ideainterpretations from the intellectual community. Because research discoveriesare driven by recombining equipment genealogies, a fan-shaped pattern ofdiscovery paths is hypothetically possible, although some of these are notfollowed up because of the social focus of attention. Different sciences mightbe historically constructed from the same point in time. It is the social processof seizing on the lineage of equipment that advances most quickly on theresearch front which cuts off some of these directions and exalts one of them.Our formula for high-consensus science becomes: competitive philosophicalnetworks plus empiricism carried out with a fast-moving genealogy of researchtechnologies.mathematics becomes a discovery-making machineThere is an alternative route to rapid-discovery science. Another key to thescientific revolution was not laboratory equipment but mathematics. Copernicusoverthrew geocentric astronomy not with new observations but by mathematicallysimplifying old data. The two routes may coincide; many aspects ofthe scientific revolution of the 1600s and 1700s were carried out not only byexperiment but also by formulating quantitative principles for the results. Butthe two routes were not identical. A mathematical revolution preceded thetakeoff of scientific research by two or three generations; the upsurge in thenumber of noteworthy mathematicians in Europe started in the 1490s,12 andthe first big advances began around 1520–1550 with Ferro, Cardan, andTartaglia in the general solution of higher-order algebraic equations, leadingto the expansion of new mathematical fields with Viète.According to a familiar line of argument, mathematization of the worldviewproduced modern science. The difficulty is that traditional mathematicalscience, such as astronomy among the Greeks, Chinese, or Indians, does nothave the characteristics of consensus and rapid discovery which are central tomodern science. Mathematics in general is not sufficient to bring about consensus-making, fast-moving science; only a particular kind of mathematicsprovides the key.What kind of mathematics can this be? The mathematical revolution unfoldswhen mathematics itself becomes a research technology. That is to say,technology is a set of embodied practices which bring about reliable, repeatableresults. Such techniques, although not consisting in a complex physical apparatus,nevertheless are material: they consist in methods for writing equationson wax or paper, or placing sticks on a counting board, following procedures538 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsfor moving emblems from one place to another until certain kinds of resultsare obtained. Platonic ideologies to the contrary, mathematics does not existpurely in the mind; it is a set of practices, developed by generations of tinkering,and an integral part of these practices is the physical “equipment” with whichthey are connected. This is not so distant from our implicit definition of amachine as a material entity, for every machine consists in the combination ofthe physical object with skills for manipulating it. Sets of mathematical symbolson paper, lined up in equations and rearranged according to rules, represent apractical activity rather than simply a set of abstract ideas.Turning mathematics into a problem-solving machine was not simply amatter of new notation, although the emergence of symbolism did take placeat the time of the mathematical revolution. There had been episodes of syncopated,or abbreviated, algebra before (Diophantus ca. 250 c.e., Brahmaguptaca. 630 c.e.), but these had not been consistently followed up, and mostof Chinese, Greek, and Muslim mathematics was argued out in words, withthe assistance of geometrical diagrams. In medieval Christendom, Fibonacci’smath (ca. 1200) was rhetorical; so were the difficult and involved proofs ofSwineshead “the Calculator,” as well as the generalizing efforts of Regiomontanusin the mid-1400s. Syncopated forms arose in the early 1500s in arithmeticand algebra, especially with the “reckoning masters” of the commercialGerman cities, and the symbolic apparatus moved rapidly forward with Viète,reaching what became more or less the standard modern form with Descartes.There are several reasons why we should not take notation per se as thekey to the mathematical takeoff. Much of the development of notation tookplace not among mathematicians producing creative new results, but in thetextbooks explaining commercial arithmetic which proliferated from the 1480sonward.13 Still less should we regard the spread of Hindu-Arabic numerals,with place notation and the zero sign, as the key. These were not associatedwith higher mathematics in their place of origin; they provoked no creativityat all when they became available in Byzantium, and they were known inmedieval Europe centuries before the mathematical takeoff of the 1500s (Kazhdanand Epstein, 1985: 145; Smith, 1951). On the side of the intellectuals, themathematical “machinery” which began to automate the solution of equationswas often formulated without benefit of the more concise notation. Cardan’sexposition was rhetorical, but he gave general rules for solving equations bymanipulating and substituting terms so as to turn unknown expressions intothe form of solvable ones. Viète was more syncopated than symbolic, still usingsome verbal argument; but he clearly recognized the generality of the unknowns,distinguishing assumed unknowns from assumed givens. Even withthis unwieldy apparatus, he developed the machinery of problem-solving procedureby creating new equations to substitute into old ones. Pascal, as late asCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 539the 1650s, gave his theorems rhetorically; nevertheless he was in the swing ofthe new abstract procedures, and he gave the first clear explanation of themethod of mathematical induction (Boyer, 1985: 335, 397).More significant for mathematical discovery was the drive to find devicesfor improving scientific calculations. First came the expansion of trigonometrictables as a tool for improving the precision and speed of astronomical calculations.In the 1460s, Regiomontanus compiled a text of trigonometry fromGreek and Arab sources, based primarily on sine functions. Two generationslater Copernicus produced new trigonometric tables, and his assistant Rheticusworked out a trigonometry of all six functions with elaborate tables for each.Such tables may be regarded as a rather low-level empirical extension ofexisting mathematical methods into adjacent areas, but the effort spilled overinto shortcuts in calculation. Formulae for substituting the addition of cosinesfor their multiplication were a great improvement in the clumsy arithmetic ofthe time; these algorithms of trigonometric algebra were developed in the 1580sby Viète and others. This labor-saving device was quickly picked up by astronomerssuch as Tycho Brahe. From there a visitor brought it to Napier inScotland, who generalized the idea into logarithms in the early 1600s. Theconcern for a technology of calculation led to mechanical devices as well asconceptual ones. Galileo in 1597 constructed and marketed computationalcompasses, a device analogous to a slide rule for quick computations. Thefocus of concern at this time is shown by the fact that Galileo was competingagainst a similar device invented by Burgi, a rival of Napier in the discoveryof logarithms. Still later, in 1642 we find Pascal at the very beginning of hiscareer building and selling a mechanical calculating machine (Boyer, 1985:338–340, 351, 396).The revolution in algebra followed the same path in a more abstract way.Algebra initially consisted of shortcuts in arithmetic, principles which coverwhole classes of calculations. Algebra advanced to new terrain when it formulatedsuch methods in the form of meta-rules about how to solve abstractequations. The very substance of algebra, and of abstract mathematics generally,comprises the methods for solving lower-order problems. Pure mathematicsbecomes an independent activity when intellectuals concentrate ondeveloping algorithms apart from their application. The takeoff of abstractmathematics in the early 1500s came as just such a research forefront wasemerging, with the discovery of general methods for solving the cubic andquartic equations by the mathematicians around Tartaglia and Cardan. By thetime of Viète, techniques were being developed for problems of much higherdegree. In the process, other areas of mathematics such as trigonometry andgeometry were being brought in as tools, resulting in cross-fertilization amongthese fields. The genealogies of mathematical techniques were beginning topropagate.540 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe onset of the mathematical revolution was marked by a surge of interestin improving the efficiency of problem solving all across the board. We see thesame impulse in many areas. The development of abbreviated notation incommercial arithmetic was one version; the expansion of trigonometric toolsfor astronomy was another; the search for general algebraic methods of solutionwas yet another. Only the third of these explicitly led to an arena of puremathematics, but the competition soon pulled the other branches into ongoingcontact.These were the leading areas of activity in mathematics, but not the onlykind. Traditional Greek mathematics, which consisted largely of geometry, wasrevived, extended, and combined with the newer branches. Among Humanistscholars there was an increased interest in Greek mathematical texts (Rose,1975). The fact that most of these had already been available in medievalChristendom suggests that the concern for new translations was the result ofthe upsurge of mathematical creativity rather than vice versa. In the late 1500sand into the 1600s, interest peaked in a Humanistic brand of mathematicalpuzzle: restoring the lost portions of texts such as Apollonius (Boyer, 1985:330, 351, 380). Since the mathematical revolution was already launched, itappears that the most advanced Greek work was sought out and extendedbecause the Europeans under their own impulse now were working at thislevel. Transmission of old texts, in other words, was not the cause but to aconsiderable extent the effect of the crescendo of new mathematics.Greek geometry was recruited to the new mathematics but was certainlynot its leading edge. Geometry was the most conservative area of mathematicsfrom the point of view of problem-solving technology, attached as it was toconcrete representations without general notation or higher-order rules forsolution. Descartes, who put the final touches on the mathematical revolution,introduced his reform of geometry by explaining that his aim was to freegeometry from the figures that fatigue the mind; like Fermat, who simultaneouslydeveloped a version of coordinate geometry, Descartes was concerned tobreak out of the clumsy geometric methods of the Greeks (Discourse onMethod 2.17, in Descartes, 1985: 119; see also Mahoney, 1980). Descarteswas a militant advocate of the modern algebraic approach, freeing the lastremaining area of mathematics from the Humanistic revival of the classics andturning it into a rapid problem-solving technique.Even in classical geometry, new methods were formulated as the mathematicalrevolution got under way. The initial concern came from paintersinterested in the theory of perspective; the first new curve since ancient timeswas constructed by Durer around 1525, about the same time that Copernicusproduced a new curve by compounding two circular motions (Boyer, 1985:320, 326). The work of Kepler in the early 1600s on planetary orbits and ofGalileo in the 1630s on projectiles fitted these motions to conic sections knownCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 541since the Greeks. The upheaval in mathematical method incorporated theseclassical curves into the central achievements of the new mathematical science.Kepler generalized Archimedean methods to various solids of revolution, andshowed that the familiar conic sections were transformations of one another;Galileo reinterpreted conic sections as products of the combination of twomotions (Boyer, 1985: 356–358). These discoveries were results of the newalgebraic vision applied to geometry.Sustained discovery in mathematics was well along by the time of Viète inthe 1580s. With Viète the combination of different mathematical fields becamea discovery-making technique: the new higher algebra was combined withgeometric methods of solution, the new trigonometry turned into algebraicfunctions. The new algebraic geometry developed by Viète, Descartes, andFermat went beyond traditional plane and solid figures into a more abstractspace, in which lines, squares, cubes, and higher powers were all treated asquantities in the same equation. Descartes’s Geometry closes with an explicitoverview of the theory of equations. By the mid-1600s, whole regions of highermathematics were emerging through recombining subspecialties. New methodswere developed for the algebraic solution of problems relating to curves,especially where the new curves raised issues of motion and of infinitesimalchanges and their summation. Out of these problems arose a crude calculus inthe hands of Galileo, Roberval, Cavalieri, and Torricelli, perfected in the nextgeneration by Newton and Leibniz.Between the time of Viète and Descartes, mathematics was transformedinto a machinery for manipulating equations. In part this marked a changefrom verbal arguments to abbreviations to the invention of symbols for givens,unknowns, and operations. The decisive step was to set up systems of equationswith explicit rules for how to substitute and recombine them; by followingthese rules of manipulation, one could gain the same advantages that resultedfrom introducing a forefront of research equipment into science. Tinkeringwith the mathematical machinery could open up new areas of application andgenerate new results, turning mathematics into a moving forefront of research.And perfecting the procedures for manipulating equations—the equivalent oftinkering with the machinery until it is reliable—yields absolute certainty ofresults, because results are absolutely repeatable.This procedure is not exclusively modern; the history of mathematicsconsists in building up just such a technology for manipulating classes ofexpressions so that results are highly repeatable. One might say that this iswhat defines mathematics: it is the cumulated practices of tinkering with theoperations of counting and measuring, proceeding on to higher-order generalizationsabout classes of such operations. These skills have always beenembodied in a technology, though usually tacit and not sufficiently portable to542 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathshave the kind of widespread repeatability that is the social basis of certainty.It was this takeoff in manipulating the machinery of mathematics that constitutedthe European mathematical revolution.Overlaps among the Networks: World ComparisonHow then did this revolution come about? Why did a genealogy of researchtechnologies build up, promoting rapid discovery, first in mathematics, then innatural science? For a sociological answer, let us look at the networks.The scientific-mathematical and philosophical networks overlap to a highdegree in the 1600s, so much so that they appear to be one revolution ratherthan two. Of 6 major philosophers in that century, 5 are active scientists; 2of them—Descartes and Leibniz—are mathematicians of the first rank. If wego to the secondary philosophers of the 1600s, 3 of 14 are scientists, butthese 3 include another scientific star—Pascal—and two others, Gassendi andMersenne, who are at the center of the network of correspondence whichorganizes the self-conscious movement that becomes in the next generation theRoyal Society and the Académie des Sciences.14European philosophy in the 1700s and 1800s continues to be linked toscience, although not to the same degree as in the Golden Century.15 Majorphilosophers in the West seem to have acquired some of their special creativityfrom close connection to science, as the connection was much stronger thanamong secondaries. Even philosophers known for their critiques of science—such as Berkeley, Hume, and Rousseau—were in close contact with scientificnetworks.Although this connection reached its peak during the scientific revolution,a connection between the networks of science and philosophy was long-standingin the West. In ancient Greece, the mathematical network was interwovenwith the philosophical one throughout their classical periods of creativity.16 Ofthe three earliest lineages of philosophers, all began with a reputed mathematician:Thales, Pythagoras, and Leucippus. Not only the Pythagorean but theSophist network as well was full of mathematicians. It was in the milieu of thelatter that the first “mathematical revolution” took place; by the late 400sb.c.e., the classic puzzles were being posed (trisecting an angle, squaring acircle, tripling the volume of a cube), axiomatic proofs were afoot, geometricresults were collecting. Plato established his Academy by surrounding himselfwith former Pythagoreans and other mathematical innovators.Throughout the 300s b.c.e., the network of mathematicians and astronomersin Figure 10.2 broadly overlaps with the philosophical network comprisingthe interconnected schools of Plato, Eudoxus, and Aristotle; there is alsosome scientific competition from the lineages of Democritus and of the Stoics.Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 543FIGURE 10.2. NETWORK OVERLAP OF GREEK MATHEMATICIANSAND PHILOSOPHERS, 600 B.C.E.–600 C.E.544 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 545Every head of the Academy from Plato through Arcesilaus (excepting onlyPolemon) is known as a mathematician (albeit a minor one); the same is trueof Aristotle’s school through Strato, whose pupil was the great heliocentricastronomer Aristarchus. Aristotle, though critical of the mathematical philosophyof the Platonic Forms, nevertheless is important for having laid outexplicitly the formal procedures of mathematical proof. When the scientificcenter at the Alexandria Museum was founded about 300 b.c.e., it was staffedlargely by the later generations of these networks. After 200 b.c.e. we find thatthe creativity of both the philosophical network and the mathematical thinsout; thenceforward, what important activity there was tended to take place inseparation from the other. Yet again in late antiquity, when the Academy wasformally reestablished around 400 c.e., mathematics revived there, althoughwithout much creativity.Whatever is distinctive about Greek philosophy and creative about itsmathematics in its classical period seems to have come from their associationwith each other. Ancient medical science also flourished in much the samenetwork milieu as the Athenian and Alexandrian mathematical scientists; andits scientific innovativeness tended to fade too at about the same time, by 200b.c.e. In later centuries the best-known physicians were those connected withphilosophy, from the Skeptics and Methodists down to the generation of SextusEmpiricus and Galen.17Medieval Islam not only acquired Greek cultural capital but also has aneven more extreme network connection of philosophy with mathematics andscience. Virtually all of the major Islamic and Jewish philosophers (9 of 11)are within two steps of the scientific network, and 5 of 11 are themselvesscientists (al-Kindi, al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, Averroës, Maimonides). Among secondaryphilosophers, 18 of 41 are close to the scientific network, and 8 of themoverlap. As with the Greeks, the first-rate scientific stars are usually not themost important philosophers (only Ibn Sina in medicine fits that description),but 2 of them are secondary philosophers (the mathematician-logician Thabitibn Qurra and the astronomer al-Tusi). In Spain the connection between thenetworks is especially complete: all 4 of the major Islamic and Jewish philosophersand 5 of 7 secondaries are no more than one tie away.Most of the Islamic scientists in Figures 8.1 through 8.5 constitute a singlenetwork, which began in Baghdad with the translators at the House of Wisdom,and was later transplanted to Iran, Cairo, and Spain.18 This network hadtwo bases: court support for astronomers and astrologers; and medical doctors,with their independent base in endowed hospitals. The astronomers’ and thedoctors’ networks intertwined at Baghdad, brought into rivalry and contactwith the indigenous network of Islamic theologians; the result was to createthe hybrid role of the Greek-oriented falasifa (the “Arab philosophers” most546 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsfamous in Europe), as well as the theosophical hybrids with ShiÀite and othersects. The indigenous Muslim intellectuals had distinctive and ultimately morepowerful bases: the theologians at the mosques, the Sufi movements in thegeneral populace. Eventually the madrasas combined into their curriculum thecontent of most of these networks, though excluding most of the Greektradition of science. But the most famous thinkers from these theologicallyoriented networks also tend to be only a few links away from the scientists.The anti-philosopher al-Ghazali is two links away from the mathematicianÀUmar Khayyam; the leading theosophists and mystics are only a link or twofrom the cosmopolitan philosopher-scientists.Why should contact with the scientific network be so important for philosophers?It was not transmitting a specific cultural capital, for the philosophiesof al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, Averroës, and the others owed nothing to thealgebraic breakthroughs of the mathematicians; at best they incorporated anastronomical vision into their hierarchical cosmologies. Al-Ghazali and themystics al-Hallaj and Suhrawardi were even less concerned with scientificcontent. There is, however, a sociological pattern: in the Islamic networks, aselsewhere, the major philosophers are closer to the scientific networks than thesecondary philosophers. A larger proportion of the major philosophers werethemselves active in science, although usually with only minor success.The leading philosophers were interested in science because of a coincidenceamong cosmopolitan orientations. Mathematics, astronomy, and other sciencesare cosmopolitan topics, detached from the particulars of theology and valuetheory. The network of scholars assembling scientific texts at Baghdad, thenmigrating from home to home for almost 20 generations, began as an intersectariannetwork of Christians, Babylonian star worshippers, Zoroastrians,and Muslim travelers to India and Byzantium. In the later period, after thesuppression of most of the non-Muslim religions, the core network was mediatedby cosmopolitans among the Jews. Correspondingly, the major philosopherwas the one whose ideas had the most general scope; and this came frombringing together links from the most diverse networks. Contact with thecosmopolitan scientific network became the intellectual base for all the moreuniversalistic Islamic philosophers. And since creativity occurs by negation aswell as by synthesis, even the anti-scientists and anti-cosmopolitans had theirgreatest originality when they were shaped by conflict with cosmopolitanscientists or the networks connecting to them; this is so even if the result wasto promote a mystical or particularistic alternative, as among many prominentMuslim and Jewish conservatives. Conversely, the energy of focused networkconflicts among philosophers, and the drive toward philosophical abstraction,helped promote creativity on the scientific side.By itself, philosophers’ interest in science does not guarantee that scienceCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 547will be very creative. We see this by comparison to medieval Christendom(Figures 9.3 through 9.5). This was not a very notable period for scientificinnovation, but there is a remarkable overlap between scientific interests andthe main philosophical networks. In the 1200s Grosseteste and his lineage(Adam Marsh, Roger Bacon) made science the center of their philosophies; sodid Bacon’s great contemporary and rival Albertus Magnus. Aquinas, thoughonly marginally dabbling in science, was close to the network of scientifictranslators and researchers. Bonaventure’s student John Peckham (who wasBacon’s student too) is best known as the antagonist of Siger and the Averroists,but he was also a scientist in his own right, contributing to optics and cosmology.Medieval Christian philosophy has as much network connection withscience as we see anywhere in the Western tradition—indeed more, if we countthe at least minimal interest that a large majority of the most importantphilosophers showed in science.19But there were no scientific stars in medieval Christendom.20 In what way,then, can a connection with the core philosophers promote science in such aperiod? A clue is given by an abortive episode. The mid-1300s generation ofphilosophers at Balliol and Merton represent the high point of creative developmentsin medieval mathematics, kinematics, and mechanics; at the sametime, the Paris circle around Buridan and his pupils overthrew Aristoteleanimpetus theory, proposed coordinate geometry, and considered the movementof the earth. These were not detached networks of scientists or textual translators;both the Oxford and Paris groups were offshoots of the main networks,engaged in theological disputes (Bradwardine, Wyclif), and in avant-gardequestions of metaphysics and epistemology (Autrecourt, Mirecourt, Buridan;see Figure 9.6). The dynamics of the philosophical network, the nominalistmovement, and the shift toward the arts curriculum turned attention towardtopics of science; the combative energy and the drive toward abstraction inphilosophy for a brief period now spilled over into scientific innovation. Whatlives by the philosophical network dies by the network. As the entire intellectualarena of the late 1300s went into crisis, technical developments in philosophyand in science alike became buried in factionalism and loss of focusin the attention space. The accomplishments of Swineshead, Buridan, andOresme and their circles were lost from view as the attention space lost focusin the chaos of decentralization, whose sources were examined in Chapter 9.A similar analysis may be performed for the late Muslim scientific stars,including al-Tusi (mid-1200s), whose astronomy was mathematically equivalentto that of Copernicus. Nevertheless, the Islamic network surroundingal-Tusi is marked by neither rapid discovery nor consensus (Huff, 1993). Heretoo the scientists are in the mainstream of the philosophical network; al-Tusiand al-Shirazi are notable for synthesizing Ibn Sina’s Neoplatonism with the548 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsSufi illuminationism prominent at the time (DSB, 1981: 11:249). Their sciencebecame buried by the scholasticism of the madrasas which dominated laterIslamic intellectual life. In both cases of abortive scientific advance, Christianand Islamic, loss of focus by the entire philosophical network dissolved thepossibility of cumulatively building on high points of scientific creativity, oreven remembering it.Consider now a case in which scientific and philosophical networks sustainedinteraction, indeed bootstrapped themselves cumulatively to levels longremembered by the generations which followed. In Greece from the verybeginning of philosophical activity, from 600 down to about 200 b.c.e., thenetwork of mathematicians is virtually identical with a major segment of thephilosophical network. What difference did this make for mathematics? As anordinary practical activity of reckoning or measurement, mathematics generallyshows little tendency toward formulating abstract theorems or rapidlyinnovating. It was the intellectual networks that seized on mathematics, interpretingit as a clue to a cosmology rivaling other cosmologies (Pythagoras), orturning it into a challenge to solve paradoxical problems (the Sophists). It wasthe philosophical network which made Greek mathematics competitive andinnovation-oriented as well as generalized and abstract. As results accumulated,the philosophical schools most interested in orderly synthesis promotedthe axiomatic method of formal derivation; these networks, deriving fromDemocritus, the Platonists, and Aristoteleans alike, led to Euclid, Eratosthenes,and Archimedes. Astronomers, and in another branch medical practitioners,became part of the central network and were spurred to generalize abstractsystems on the terrain of philosophical cosmologies. Greek science set themodel for generalized science because it no longer represented a range ofpractical activities pursued in private by low-status occupations, but rathersignaled a competition in the philosophical attention space.an east-west divergence in scientists’ andphilosophers’ networksCompare a crucial episode in the network history of China. Chinese mathematicsdiffered from the Greek puzzle-solving contests, with their impetustoward proofs and axiomatic systems of abstract principles. For the most part,Chinese math was practical calculation related to surveying and astronomy;abstract developments were little valued and often forgotten by the officialtextbooks. The cause of this difference may be seen in the relationship amongthe networks. In China the practical mathematicians and astronomers werelargely separate from the philosophers.21 Initial development could have gonea different way; during the late Warring States, philosophers such as Hui Shihand Kung-sun Lung produced quasi-mathematical paradoxes reminiscent ofCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 549the Eleatics and Sophists, and the Mohists responded with formal geometricaldefinitions. Here Chinese intellectuals seem to have been on a similar path asthe Greeks. But this development of mathematics from the philosophical sidewas not followed up after the Mohist chain disappeared.When bureaucracy consolidated in the Han dynasty, mathematicians, astronomers,and philosophers alike compiled canonical texts. The mathematicstextbook Chou Pei was apparently assembled by the Confucian school andendorsed the kaitian astronomical system; the Nine Sections textbook favoredthe rival huntian cosmology. Later the leading skeptical and anti-occultistConfucians of the Old Text school overlapped extensively with the astronomersof the huntian system. The upsurge of mathematics and astronomy at this timeseems to have been connected to the struggle between rival branches of Confucianism.The scholasticism of this period did not encourage abstract philosophicaltreatment, however, as Confucians absorbed the divination texts intotheir synthesis and emphasized numerological correspondences for magicalprognostication. The tail end of the Han intellectual network did produce onelast flurry of abstract mathematics in the governmental disintegration of thelate 200s c.e. The greatest of the early Chinese mathematicians, Liu Hui, wasapparently a scholar-official who recombined surveying techniques from alow-status bureau with those of astronomical calculation used in a higherstatusbureau, treating higher-degree equations and introducing the first explicitproofs (Swetz, 1992). This combination of specialties happened at thetime of (and in some network links with) the philosophers of the “DarkLearning” movement, which similarly reorganized official and oppositionalnetworks, revising their classic texts and thereby raising Chinese philosophyto its high point of abstract metaphysics.Thereafter the networks of mathematicians and philosophers were almosttotally separate. In subsequent dynasties the mathematicians were almost allgovernment officials, cut off from the administrative and historical bureausand literary circles in which the Confucian philosophers worked. The Buddhistswho dominated philosophy down to 900 c.e. were generally entirelyoutside the realm of government administration and cut off from officialmathematics.22There was one more round of innovation in Chinese mathematics, thegeneralized “celestial element method” for solving higher algebraic equationsin several unknowns, produced in the Sung dynasty. It is tempting to connectthis to the Neo-Confucian movement in philosophy, but there were very fewnetwork connections between that movement and mathematics. Neo-Confucianismbegan with a branch concerned with occult numerology, but its mostsuccessful lineage was opposed both to numerology and to reformers whowanted to elevate mathematics in the official examination system. Nor do the550 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathspeak generations coincide; the outburst of Neo-Confucianism came in the years1030–1100, and the culminating systems of Chu Hsi and Lu Chiu-yüan wereproduced 1170–1200. The celestial element algebra, however, began to developafter 1100 away from the court circles of the Neo-Confucians, and the starmathematicians were active in the period 1240–1300.If there is a connection, it is a conflictual one, based on struggles over theexternal base. The early Neo-Confucians were the conservative faction in aperiod of administrative crisis when rival reforms of the examination systemwere alternatively implemented and reversed. Then came full-scale state breakdown;during the disruption of official bureaucracy, the celestial element algebrawas created by private teachers and out-of-office officials during the alienJürchen monarchy of north China after 1126, culminating during the Mongolconquest (1220–1280). The efflorescence of mathematical schools at this timehad overtones of a popular religious movement; the mathematics itself wasmore abstract than practical; conditions of life during the military conquestswere violent and unsettled; and the terminology and titles of the books implymiraculously new and secret methods. The movement is obscure and in needof greater study. The breakdown of the segregated governmental bureaus forpractical mathematics seems to be a key; when they were reestablished, thenew algebra died. In 1313 Neo-Confucianism became the official basis for theexamination system; soon after, the ability to understand the celestial elementmethod died out in China.23In India the separation between science and philosophy was even morecomplete. Chronologies for India are weak and biographical data meager. Forwhat it is worth, there are no recorded contacts between philosophical andmathematical networks, and no individuals overlap both activities (DSB, 1981;Smith, 1951; Pingree, 1981). Indian science and mathematics were especiallyfragmentary, full of disagreeing systems. Mathematics and astronomy importedfrom China and Greece and contact with the Arabs combined with bits ofindigenous science in a jumble of texts which the Arab traveler al-Biruni (ca.1030) in his India described as “a mixture of pearl shells and sour dates . . .both kinds of things are equal in their eyes.” Organizationally, the mathematicians,astronomers, and medical doctors were based in private familisticlineages and guilds, never part of the sustained argument provided by philosophicalnetworks. Public networks of argument did exist in India; its philosophicallineages reached high levels of abstract development. Only mathematicsand science were not carried along with it.why do philosophical networks promote science?The philosophical networks represent the central attention space of the communityof intellectuals, where arguments of widest consequence are carriedCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 551out. Philosophy drives up the level of abstraction and reflexivity, promotesperiodic movements of synthesis, consciously argues over methods, and therebylays down epistemological principles. Transferred to the topics of naturalisticobservation and mathematics, the philosophical networks turn empirical compilationsinto theories, lay methods of commercial arithmetic or practicalgeometry into puzzle-solving contests carried out under increasingly stringentrules. The philosophical networks import not only consciousness of abstractionbut also a social impetus to innovation. This appears to have happened in earlyperiod of ancient Greece, for a time in the Islamic networks, and again inEurope after 1500. But the inherent tendency of abstract philosophers toconcern themselves with cosmopolitan topics on the terrain of science does notin itself lead to sustained scientific innovation, or indeed to consensus. Therewere periods of relatively accelerated discovery in Greece and Islam, but theresearch front as a whole did not become “technologized” with explicit concernfor tinkering with methods for producing new results. The rather widespreadconcern of the philosophical stars of medieval Christendom with topics ofscience was not sufficient to create much science.The lesson of abortive episodes such as the Mohists, the Oxford-Parisnominalists, and al-Birtruji’s and al-Tusi’s astronomy is that philosophicalnetworks by themselves can provide a temporary impetus to scientific innovation.But the philosophical network itself is subject to the law of small numbers,inherently anti-consensual in its creative periods, while the imposition of aforced consensus in an official doctrine or the deadening effect of a scholasticcurriculum results in losing innovation entirely. Scientific takeoff is promotedby overlap between practical mathematicians or other empirical and observationalprofessions and the philosophical networks; but sustained developmentin mathematics and science depends on growing genealogies of technologiesfor rapid discovery, allowing scientists to outstrip the factionalism of thephilosophers. The impetus of philosophical competition and abstraction whichpromoted Greek and Hellenistic science was lost as astronomy became transformedinto astrological religion, number theory into numerology, and bothinto Neoplatonist cosmology. The dynamics of philosophical networks canlaunch episodes of scientific discovery but can also undermine them.The development of scientific networks is a special application of thegeneral process governing all intellectual change. External conditions rearrangematerial bases for intellectual occupations, and these in turn lead to restructuringnetworks, generating new alliances and oppositions in the attentionspace. We have seen clues in China, where the usual segregation of mathematiciansand astronomers into specialized and low-status segments of the imperialbureaucracy was broken down precisely during the episodes of creativityin abstract mathematics.552 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFor the takeoff of rapid-discovery science in Europe, there are two majorcandidates for external conditions: early capitalism and the Reformation.Capitalism gives an impetus to commercial mathematics.24 But low-statuspractitioners do not usually attract the attention of the core intellectual network;and by itself, the contents of commercial arithmetic does not automaticallylead to the abstract puzzles of higher mathematics. Capitalism also givessome impetus to new technology, and we have seen that some of this equipment—most famously, mining pumps—was brought into the network of “mechanicalphilosophers” and made into a technology of discovery. We mustbeware of crude technological determinism, and of projecting backwards therelationship between technology, capitalism, and science, which became characteristiconly after the “second industrial revolution” following the 1880s. AsWeber ([1923] 1961: 129–136; Collins, 1986: 19–44) pointed out, the rationalizedcapitalism which generates self-sustaining growth depends on a mixtureof social ingredients. Background conditions must free up all the factors ofproduction (land, labor, capital) so that they can move on the market, underthe control of entrepreneurs, and protected by a legal system guaranteeingprivate property and facilitating its transactions through organized financialinstruments. Sustained technological innovation typically occurs late in thisprocess; conversely, the first few centuries of the capitalist takeoff involvedrationalized procedures in agriculture typically without any new machinery atall.25 Capitalism in Europe during the 1500s and 1600s made available somefragmentary developments of machinery that could be pressed into intellectualservice by the philosophical networks; but the impetus to speed up theirevolution as pieces of research equipment came from the side of the philosophicalnetwork with its dynamics of competition over the attention space.Capitalism by itself did little to rearrange the intellectual networks. Ofgreater importance as an external condition was the Reformation, or moreprecisely, the struggle over church politics culminating in the Reformation andCounterreformation. Let us avoid any reflection argument. Science does notreflect the spirit of Protestantism, nor indeed of Catholicism or wearied secularismeither. The familiar arguments of Weber and Merton rely too heavilyon an episode rather late in the rearrangement of networks, the coincidence ofthe British Invisible College with the Puritan Revolution; the Catholic side ofthe network was older, and in many respects more central. Most important,the late medieval church had been breaking apart for centuries. The papal bidfor theocratic power over Christian Europe had crested in the mid-1200s;thereafter the consolidating national states, most prominently France andSpain, had struggled to make the papacy the instrument of their nationalpower; other states, in response, withdrew into increasingly nationally organizedchurches. The conciliar movement of the early 1400s, in which CusanusCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 553was so prominent, was one of many organizational schemes to decentralizeand democratize the church. The Reformation is just one spectacular episodein a long series of conflicts and reorganizations of political and religious power.The Catholic side was by no means the lineup of reactionaries that Protestantpropaganda made it out to be; movements for reform which antedatedthe Reformation continued to proliferate. Some, like the Jesuits, Jansenists,and Oratorians who figure largely in our narrative of networks, were concernedto revitalize the unitary Catholic Church from inside. Other prominentindividuals, such as Bruno, were freelancers between Protestant and Catholiccamps, promoting schemes for ending religious strife and reuniting Christendomby still more radical doctrinal reform; often they appealed to a liberalpope as more promising and less fanatical than militant Protestant princes.Occasional Protestants were picked out by the cosmopolitans as the center forreligious reunification, as in the Rosicrucian movement of the early 1600s, andthe hopes pinned on the Elector Palatine (Yates, 1972).Here we have an external basis for network reorganization of grand proportions.Between the church and the rival courts were encompassed all thebases of intellectual life: the old universities as training centers of the church;the new Protestant universities; rival educational schemes put forward asProtestant academies or Jesuit schools; papacy, church politicians, and secularcourts alike as patrons for Humanists and freelance intellectuals. The so-called“stagnation” of philosophy in the late Middle Ages was, sociologically speaking,a chaotic fragmentation of networks in this multi-sided attention space.The increasing polarization of Reformation and Counterreformation providedsimplification, focusing attention on a few key lines of controversy at the sametime that it greatly increased the level of emotional energy. That is why wenow see the intersection between theology and a scientific topic such as astronomy.It is not that astronomy reflected theological positions, for it was not justProtestants who looked for innovation of the kind exemplified by Copernicusand Kepler; there are mixtures of traditionalists and innovators on both sides.The church politics of the Reformation period had again elevated theologiansin the attention space. Theological intellectuals now hit on the slow-movingdevelopments which were taking place in the cosmopolitan arena of science.Attention gradually built up, as innovations such as Copernicus’s were translatedfrom the narrow sphere of technical specialists into the largest arena,where they became emblems for questions of tradition or change. Astronomy,and by their preexisting connections mathematics, now became the focus ofattention for the entire intellectual community. Tremendous emotional energywas generated; competitiveness rose; educated persons everywhere were pulledinto the magnet of recruitment. Technical contests in mathematics, and the554 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsrush for discoveries in science, became public; their stakes became the acclaimof large audiences. The takeoff of rapid discovery in mathematics and sciencewas the result.how do scientific networks affect philosophy?Our main concern for the moment is the effects of the network overlap on thescientific revolution. Let us briefly consider the effects in the opposite direction,implied by our world comparisons. What is distinctive about the Western orbitis that the mathematical-astronomical networks are often very closely integratedwith the main philosophical networks: this is so in the key formativeperiod for philosophy as well as for mathematics in Greece; it is one of thekey lines of development in Islam, and a foil for the important indigenous lines.Their joint overlap was central for the community of Muslims, Jews, andChristians which formulated a cosmopolitan “religion of reason” in Spain, andit continued to shape the interests of Christian philosophers. What does thismathematized, astronomized, philosophical tradition of the West have that isdistinctive on the philosophical side? The simultaneous creation of abstractmathematics and self-consciously abstract philosophy in Greece made mathematicsinto an ideal of transcendent reality. The order of the numbers wastaken as the frame of the universe, on both the lower level of cosmology andthe higher level of theology and ultimately of ontology. One consequence inthe West, lacking in Asia, was an emphasis on a graded hierarchy of being,from one ontological level down to the next. This hierarchical conception ofthe universe made astronomy philosophically much more important in the Westthan in the East; the planetary spheres could be identified with gradations ofontological perfection. Physical science was easy to carry along in a Westernphilosopher’s baggage; even if parts of it concerned rather degraded levels ofmetaphysical reality, it had a place in the system.In metaphysics, Western mathematized philosophy was constantly remindedof levels of abstraction. Its bias was toward the realism of universals(just the opposite of the Buddhist bias toward nominalism and world illusion);this became fruitful for philosophical exploration whenever the energy ofcontroversy started up, since the concepts of universals and particulars were aready-made arena in which one might initiate a dispute. And since the conceptof a hierarchy of abstraction was coordinated with the more concrete cosmologyof observational science, disputes over nominalism and radical particularism(as in Duns Scotus) could stir up revisions of scientific theory, just asuniversals also implied scientific laws. These interconnections explain why somany of the most innovative medieval Christian philosophers often touchedon scientific topics, if only from the conceptual side. In epistemology, whereverCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 555the mathematical-hierarchic view was dominant, the effect was to identifyuniversals with reality and truth with that exemplified by apparently non-sensuous,a prori mathematical proof. The issues of epistemology, whether andhow truth can exist, were settled by fiat, built into the conceptual frame itself.That is one reason why, whenever Neoplatonic ontology is challenged (by IbnTaymiyah and Ibn Khaldun among the Muslims, by the Christian nominalists,again in the breakdown of the entire medieval-cum-ancient-Greek apparatusin the 1600s), epistemology comes again to the fore.We see here additional reasons why European philosophers, at the time ofthe crisis of church politics, would be motivated to seek out the developmentsamong technical specialists in astronomy and mathematics. It is not thatmedieval philosophy was anti-science; quite the contrary: a particular versionof science was built into its conceptual framework. Upheaval in the philosophicalnetworks could not avoid overturning the framework of traditional scienceas well.Three Revolutions and Their NetworksWhat is commonly called the scientific revolution was actually three overlappingrestructurings of the intellectual field. The math and science revolutionsconsisted of transformation into rapidly moving research fronts, in effect thediscovery of discovery-making techniques. To speak of “revolution” here is abit metaphorical, since the acceleration of discovery making built up over fourto six generations; it was only toward the end of this development—in themid-1600s generation of Descartes, Mersenne, and Boyle—that the intellectualworld became decisively convinced that a new basis of knowledge makingexisted. It was this recognition that set off what we can call the philosophicalrevolution, the putting of philosophy to new uses, which gave Descartes thereputation as founder of modern philosophy.The takeoff of philosophical creativity that began at this time was not arevolution in the same sense as the math and science revolutions; philosophyremained philosophy, which is to say it continued to be structured by irreconcilablerivalries and did not acquire a rapidly moving research front distinguishingit from previous philosophy. But the philosophical networks arecrucial in the math and science revolutions nevertheless. Not only did thephilosophical revolution put the seal of approval on the previous revolutions,giving them general significance for the world. But also from the outset allthree networks were entwined; without their interconnection, the accelerateddiscovery that made up the mathematics and science revolutions could not havecome about.556 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe MathematiciansThe mathematical revolution built up first. Part of the increasing interest inmathematics came from practical interests, and one can date the gradualoutpouring of commercial math textbooks from the late 1400s. But practicalmath was not the source of the innovation in problem-solving techniques whichconstituted the core of the new mathematics. The more abstract realms ofmathematics were created as mathematicians made discoveries about generalprocedures. Puzzle-solving techniques, such as algorithms for solving higherorderequations, became topics of discovery in their own right. The takeoff ofmath occurred when it became an intellectual game as well as a matter ofpractical application. Contact with the network of philosophers turned theactivity of low-status reckoning masters into the high-prestige competition ofthe intellectuals who made the claims to matters of greatest importance.Innovative mathematicians emerged in the philosophical networks. Regiomontanuscame from the network around Cusanus and was patronized by theHumanist leader Bessarion. Cusanus was not a skilled mathematician in atechnical sense, but his philosophy was permeated with mathematical conceptions,and we see here a general intellectual concern raising mathematics intoits orbit. Copernicus came from these same networks in central Europe; hestudied first with a pupil of Regiomontanus at Cracow, and later lived nearKönigsberg (from which Regiomontanus originated and received his Latinname). During 1496–1505 Copernicus studied in Italy, making contact withthe humanistic network, as Cusanus and Regiomontanus had previously; Copernicusmet Ficino’s Platonist followers and overlapped at Padua with theAristotelean Pomponazzi and at Bologna with the mathematician Scipione delFerro. Not that Copernicus necessarily borrowed his mathematical or astronomicalideas from these contacts; more important is the pattern that creativityis stimulated by contact with the central focus of intellectual attention.To the extent that Copernicus’s work was propagated, it was through themore general intellectual network; his publisher Osiander was a theologyprofessor at Königsberg, and his assistant Rheticus was visited by Ramus, theParisian reformer of school logic.26 His heliocentric astronomy did not makemuch impact for two generations; when it was picked up again in the 1590sit was by Kepler, a theology student at Tübingen under the theologian Maestlin(EP, 1967: 4:329–333). What is worth stressing here is that astronomy in thisperiod was most significant as a vehicle for innovations in mathematics.Copernicus is as much a part of the initial wave of the mathematical revolutionas he is of the scientific revolution per se;27 by the time of Kepler, the discovery-making revolution was expanding from the one realm to the other. Astron-Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 557omy was a fertile ground for innovations in calculation, such as trigonometryand logarithms, as well as in geometry. And astronomy attracted ambitiousand innovative intellectuals because it was a focus of concern for a dominantfield such as theology, just now in the midst of controversies because of thecrisis in church politics (cf. Westman, 1980).Careers of other early mathematicians show the practical and commercialmath coming together with the status-centered activities of the intellectuals.Pacioli, a pupil in the atelier of the painter Piero della Francesca, published in1494 the first important mathematics textbook; Pacioli stressed the practice ofbookkeeping, but incorporated geometry from the works of Piero, and hisfigures were drawn by Leonardo da Vinci.28 None of this constituted a newdiscovery in math, but the painters added public attention to the subject, andsoon the network gave rise to the first great breakthrough in modern algebra.Cardano’s father was a friend of Leonardo; Cardano himself moved throughthe same universities where Copernicus had studied 20 years before, pickingup a secret formula for solving particular types of equations of the third degreefrom a pupil of Ferro, a probable acquaintance of Copernicus at Bologna.Tartaglia, a teacher of commercial mathematics at Venice, engaged in publicproblem-solving contests with several men in this network; by the 1530s and1540s, this set of contestants had come up with general solutions for bothcubic and quartic equations.Mathematics was becoming a matter of public prestige. Cardano and hisassistant defended a mathematical challenge from Tartaglia in the cathedral ofMilan in 1548 with the governor acting as judge. Cardano somewhat unscrupulouslytook secret formulae from his acquaintances and published them, butthis in itself shows that he was playing to a different arena than local mathematicsteachers advertising their skills by winning public contests by means ofsecret techniques. Cardano was a medical professor at the major Italian universitieswho wrote widely on philosophy and theology as well as science andmathematics. The great upsurge in the innovativeness of mathematics camejust at the time when it was shifting from a humble commercial activity to anattention-getting contest among high-status intellectuals. These contests werepushing activity into the realm of pure discovery making, far beyond issues ofpracticality. By the turn of the century Galileo, taught by a pupil of Tartaglia,was in the core intellectual networks only a few links from leading philosopherssuch as Suarez.With Descartes, the leading edge of creativity in mathematics and in philosophymerged. The prestige of one became the basis of the elevated prestigeof the other. In mathematics Descartes was not the progenitor of the revolution,but he was its first culmination. The symbolic notation had first been developedin commercial arithmetic books; Descartes raised its level of generality and558 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsmade it the standard for pure mathematics as well. Descartes trumpeted thenews that mathematics has an infallible discovery-making method. Not surprisingly,the network around him pushed rapidly into still further advancesin mathematics. Along with this spread the belief that science would followthe same path.The Scientific RevolutionIf by scientific revolution we mean the invention of the techniques of rapiddiscovery making, the scientific revolution came later than the mathematicalrevolution. From the early to mid-1500s we can speak of a quickening paceof innovation. In astronomy, Copernicus drafted his heliocentric system in1514, finished it in 1530, and gradually publicized it over the next 13 years.But it was another 50 years before Brahe’s intensive observations, and hisassistant Kepler formulated the laws of planetary motion only in 1609. Therewas no consensus in astronomy in the 1500s, nor was there a rapid andsustained movement of the research front. As an astronomer, Copernicus wasnot unlike other medieval thinkers. Oresme in the 1350s, as well as othermedievals, had raised the possibility of the earth moving in space; so didCusanus. Regiomontanus foreshadowed Copernicus’s work in many respects,elaborating trigonometry and proposing before his early death to reformastronomy, possibly with a heliocentric model (Boyer, 1985: 304). As anaccount of the observables, Copernicus’s model was not superior to Ptolemy’sgeocentric system; many professional astronomers were unconvinced on technicalgrounds. Without the takeoff of sustained developments in the nextcentury, Copernicus might well have been a forgotten late medieval figure inthe same category as Oresme or, in the Islamic world, al-Tusi.Although we cannot speak of scientific revolution during the 1500s in thestrong sense, there were several parallel strands of activity building up. Inaddition to astronomy, there were innovations in medical physiology. Servetus,at the Paris medical faculty in the 1540s, put forward a new theory of thecirculation of the blood; his colleague Vesalius, moving on to the medicalfaculty at Padua, published empirical support in 1543 and 1555. A networkof Padua professors carried on the doctrine, although empirical work wasbroken off until around 1600, when Fabricus discovered valves in the veins;his pupil William Harvey in turn performed dissections of many species ofanimals and experiments with tourniquets, and between 1616 and 1628 formulateda mechanical theory of circulation in which the heart acted as pump.Again we have an intermittent buildup culminating in the early 1600s; in thiscase the method was largely empirical rather than mathematical.A third front comprises work in chemistry, including the “occult philoso-Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 559phy” of Agrippa von Nettesheim around 1515–1530 and the alchemical andmedical theories of Paracelsus in the 1530s. In common with the developmentsin astronomy and in physiology, there was an explicit willingness to innovateand to challenge received theories of the Greeks. But although Paracelsus andother alchemists did some experimental work, there was nothing that could becalled a sustained development of discoveries nor heightened consensus.I have already noted a fourth chain that I have called the mathematicalrevolution. By the 1580s to the early 1600s, with the work of Galileo, thisflow of mathematical discovery making spilled over into experimental work inphysics. Around the same time, Stevin in Holland, who contributed to mathematicalcalculation by introducing decimal fractions, developed mechanics andhydrostatics. Stevin’s associate Snel worked on astronomy and refraction oflight (ca. 1618–1621); Snel’s protégé Beeckman conducted experiments (1626)with pumps on hydrodynamics and combustion using equipment from hisfather’s factory for candles and water conduits.29The four chains all use different methods: the mixture of math and observationin astronomy; dissection and eventually some experiment in physiology;alchemical purifications in chemistry; the focus on simplifying calculationswhich leads to the takeoff of mathematical discovery making, eventually spillingover into giving mathematical descriptions of mechanical experiments inphysics. Is there a common impulse in these developments during the 1500s?The most important social feature is that each chain gets its start whenparticular fields of investigation become entwined with the core intellectualnetworks. We have seen this already with the mathematicians from Cusanuson through Galileo and Descartes. In astronomy, I have suggested that itsintellectual energy comes from its ability to attract the interest of theologians;dangerous as it might be, the energy of controversy at the centers of attentionintroduces innovative dynamics into specialized technical fields.In physiology, the creative chain starts off with Servetus, a Spanish liberalduring the heady days of the early Reformation. Servetus deliberately movedin the leading circles. From the court of the Emperor Charles V, he traveled toBasel and Strasbourg to meet Erasmus, Bucer, and Schwenckfeld; at Paris hemet the young John Calvin—just then launching his own radical reforms—andput forward his reform both of Galen and of the Trinity. Servetus is characteristicof an era when cosmological-scientific speculation and theologicalnovelties could all be created together. There is the same mixture of scientificoccultism and theological reform among the “chemists”; Agrippa was a friendof the English reformer Colet, while Paracelsus associated with Erasmus andFranck as well as with Copernicus’s disciple Rheticus.The impulse to innovate in scientific topics appears on the fringes of thenetwork of major intellectual controversy in the 1500s. Since the center of560 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsattention was the rearrangement of theological doctrine which followed theorganizational breakup of the church, it is not surprising here that theologyfuels science. This helps explain the upsurge of innovation; but the latter is notitself a scientific revolution. Sustained discovery need not follow, as we see inchemistry. Still less does the atmosphere of theological controversy tend towardscientific consensus. We have already noted, in the conclusion of Chapter 9,that European intellectual life from the late 1300s onward became dispersedand fragmented; the landscape was populated by various scholastic factions,Humanists, mystics, and occultists without a focal point for their controversies.At first the Reformation made the situation worse. It multiplied religious sectsand systems of occultism; Copernicus, Paracelsus, and Servetus added to thecacophony of oppositions. That is why a characteristic voice of the late 1500sis Montaigne, proposing skeptical detachment from all intellectual positions;for him, Copernicus was just another absurdity of this ideological chaos.We seem as far as possible from the consensus on a body of knowledge,and from the discovery-making techniques which would become the hallmarksof modern science. Nevertheless, a new focus was beginning to crystallize inthe attention space. The Counterreformation was organizing and polarizingopinion, above all with the burgeoning Jesuit educational movement providinga new intellectual base. The mathematicians had launched their revolution ofdiscovery-making technique; and their network overlapped significantly withastronomers and with general philosophical intellectuals. The medical physiologists,too, were about to be pulled into the center of intellectual attention.Soon after 1600 most of the chains, with the exception of the chemists,came together. Astronomers, mathematicians, and physicists first formed aself-conscious front. Descartes met Beeckman in 1618 and acquired an interestin science. Stevin and Descartes both served in the army of Prince Maurice ofOrange; in the same alliance was the Huygens family, who acted as frequenthost to Descartes, and whose son Christian Huygens was encouraged in ascientific career by their distinguished visitor. In Figure 10.1 we see this Dutchcircle of physicists and mathematicians connecting with the astronomical lineageof Brahe, Maestlin, and Kepler; Kepler in turn is in contact with Galileoand with the court circle in England. Galileo connects with the mathematicallineage of Tartaglia, and also with the Jesuit thinkers in Rome. By the 1620s,Mersenne had formed his circle of correspondence, linking together virtuallyall the scientific actors and inspiring a new generation in mathematics, science,and philosophy.Somewhat apart from this math–physical science complex had been thelineage of medical physiologists. The link was forged by Harvey, whose experimentalmethod was probably influenced by contact with Galileo at Padua,where the latter was professor of mathematics. When Harvey returned toCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 561England as royal physician, science acquired another center of public fame. In1616, the very year Harvey announced his mechanical theory of circulation ofthe blood, his fellow physician Fludd launched a campaign for Cabalisticscience that brought him into controversy with Kepler and soon after withMersenne and Gassendi. Scientific links between England and the Continentalgroup were now multiplying. The intellectuals of the English court circle hadbeen predominantly literary; but Raleigh’s protégé Harriot was a mathematician,a correspondent of Kepler; and in 1620 the poet John Donne paid a visiton Kepler. The creative energy focused at the English court was now flowinginto attention to science. The opportunistic politician Bacon was promoting itwith all his literary skill; his protégé Hobbes—the friend of Harvey and of BenJonson—was traveling to meet Galileo, and eventually to a rendezvous withthe Mersenne circle and Descartes.With this we are in the mid-1600s, and into the self-conscious socialorganization of modern science. The discovery-making network had taken overthe mainstream of the intellectual community, the center where the mostattention was focused. Contact with the philosophical networks had beenimportant all along, since 1500 or even earlier, in imparting to scientists andmathematicians the competitive dynamics of innovation over matters of highgenerality. Now, for a period, the networks were virtually fused. At thismoment the world became aware of the scientific revolution.The Philosophical Revolution: Bacon and DescartesThe philosophical revolution began as the announcement of the supremacy ofscience as the one true path to knowledge. Appropriate hedges were expressedto avoid infringing on the status of religion, but the thrust was clear enough.The names that became famous for expressing this were Bacon and Descartes;they represent the networks on the observational and mathematical sides ofthe scientific revolution, respectively. But why should fame for this move havegone to philosophers, instead of to the statements of the scientists themselves?And indeed, why should philosophy have continued to exist at all after thispoint, since the avowed ideology was to replace the old philosophy with newscience?30There was in fact no dearth of general arguments by the leading scientistson behalf of their methods. Nevertheless, there was a difference in the attentionspace commanded by the scientists and the philosophers. What constitutesphilosophy is the most general claim to attention, the arguments of widest notewhich frame all the others. The scientists’ and mathematicians’ specializedtechniques of discovery making were turning the social organization of theirfields into a tighter structure than existed on the philosophers’ turf. Whether562 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthey knew it or not (and in fact they did not), philosophers continued to operateby a dialectic of disagreement under the law of small numbers; even asphilosophers took the sureness of scientific knowledge as their topic, they werebound to create diverging constructions upon this realm. Of course it ispossible for the same person to operate in several attention spaces, as apracticing scientist or mathematician, and also as philosopher. Descartes wasfamous in all three, while Bacon attempted to lead as a naturalist, thoughsuccess came only for his general philosophy.We want to know, then, why the ideology of the scientific revolution camethrough in these distinctive forms. By around 1600, many intellectuals wereaware that a revolution was afoot. Bacon’s and Descartes’s versions of theannouncement came to dominate the philosophical attention space; the otherseither were too narrowly encapsulated within particular scientific specialties,or attached themselves to a part of the philosophical field which remainedtraditional and non-revolutionary. Galileo, a famous and eloquent expositorof the new science, embedded his arguments for the new method in thediscussion of specific discoveries in kinematics, which in any case representedonly one style of scientific advance. Kepler expressed an acute understandingof the methodological points which separated the new astronomy from the old;but these arguments made little impression at the time (McMullin, 1990: 65,86). Kepler’s and Galileo’s fame came from the substance of their science; asphilosophers of scientific methodology they were upstaged.Explicit philosophical claims failed to capture the forefront because theywere not revolutionary enough. Kepler was well known as the follower of aNeoplatonic cosmology. Servetus had incorporated his argument for the circulationof the blood in a Christocentric pantheism, merging Neoplatonism witha Cabalistic interpretation of the Bible. Cardano, for all his boastful innovationin mathematics, regarded Aristotle’s texts as the criterion of truth in othermatters (De Vita Propria; Cardan, [1575] 1962: 46–47). Even Gassendi, withhis championing of Epicurean atomism, was a weak rival to Descartes. Whatproved a weakness in capturing the philosophical attention space was the lackof a clean break with the past. Whereas Bacon and Descartes radically simplifieddown to what they claimed was a new starting place, prior philosopherscientistshad continued the muddy and unfocused condition of the late medievalphilosophical space, touting one or another selection from the old arrayof contending positions.31 This is not to say that the leaders carried over nophilosophical capital from the past; Descartes drew quite heavily on scholasticphilosophy, but he was at pains to disguise his sources, and presented hismethod as a technique for disposing of all accepted knowledge and buildinganew.There is another characteristic of the philosophical break engineered byCross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 563Bacon and Descartes. Instead of mingling their science with theological positions,they presented it in as pure and unentangled a form as possible. Thiswas in sharp contrast to previous self-announced radicals. Bruno, a defenderon occasion of Copernican astronomy and other scientific innovations, proclaimedChrist a magus and hermeticism and magic as the bases for universalreligious reform. Campanella, less heretical, limited the appeal of his philosophyby attaching it to the religious politics of church reunification under thepope. The strategy of Bacon and Descartes went entirely the other way. Bothwere conventionally respectful to religion; both assiduously avoided theologicalspecifics and any taint of heresy. Their philosophy was designed not to rise orfall with the fortunes of religious reform. It was a philosophical revolutionprecisely because it successfully claimed an autonomous attention space.Bacon was a busy lawyer, politician, and litterateur; in science he was adabbler, but this was his advantage over specialized scientists writing onmethod, since he could take an overview of the broadest ideological basis forevery field of investigation. Bacon wove science into a classification of all thebranches of knowledge, comprising poesy (knowledge of the imagination),history (knowledge of memory), and philosophy (knowledge of reason) (DeDignitate 2.1). Bacon’s most striking claim is that “the art of discovery” itselfmay advance, and that with its use “the discovery of all causes and scienceswould be but the work of a few years” (New Organon, 130, 112). Baconcaptures most explicitly the underlying social characteristic of the scientificrevolution, the emergence of rapid-discovery science.That is not to say that Bacon’s method formulated what the scientists hadactually been doing, nor did it provide any real guidance to the work that wasto come. Bacon was more of a philosophical outrider to the scientific revolutionthan its leader. His inductive program was to collect information and classifyand compare it in “Tables of Difference,” from which principles of successivelyhigher generality might be derived. It was not the method of Copernicus andKepler in astronomy, nor of Galileo’s physics, nor even of Vesalius and theanatomists. Although Bacon touches on subtle points regarding unobservablesand experimentation and occasionally mentions mathematics, his emphasis ison the overall effect of his rhetoric rather than penetration or even consistencyin the details. His description of Salomon’s House is of a royal endowmentindiscriminately collecting marvels and reports from travels and from oldbooks, with only a minor part from new observation and experiment; it readslike a Baconian set piece from his Essays depicting the perfect garden adornedwith every flower and fruit. The New Atlantis is one of Bacon’s more popularisticworks, but the propagandistic touch is characteristic. Bacon’s visionserved later to give some legitimation to the Royal Society but did not foreshadowits activities very closely. The active scientists no doubt welcomed564 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsBacon’s support but deprecated his advice; Harvey said, “He philosophizes likea Lord Chancellor” (CMH, 1902–1911: 5:724).Bacon’s creativity was grounded in the intellectual networks around theEnglish court, where scientific interests were best represented by men Baconconsidered his rivals. The royal physician Gilbert published his famous compendiumof information on the magnet in 1600, five years before Bacon setout his program with The Advancement of Learning. Bacon frequently citesGilbert as exemplar of an obstacle to the true method, overgeneralizing from“the narrowness and darkness of a few experiments” (New Organon 64.347;also Bacon, 1965: 349, 233). Another rival was Raleigh, who introducedpotatoes and tobacco in the 1590s from his explorations of the Americas, didchemical experiments, and wrote a History of the World in 1614 while imprisonedin the Tower. Bacon, who had switched to the winning side in the samecourt intrigue which ruined Raleigh, prosecuted him officially and broughtabout his beheading in 1618. Bacon’s scientific efforts were in the same veinas his rivals’; he carried out a few scrappy collections on “The Natural Historyof Winds,” on “Life and Death,” and planned vast compendia, never finished,on topics such as “The History of Sympathy and Antipathy of Things” (Bacon,1965: 9–10). The only sciences that Bacon knew much about were the naturalistobservations, and these were the areas where interest had been buildingbut no techniques of discovery had emerged such as those in the mathematicalor mechanical fields.Bacon’s method reflects these connections. The method of collection andcomparison was most appropriate for the naturalist. We find a parallel versionof “Baconian” inductivism formulated independently in Hamburg, in the1630s, in a work of logic by Jungius, otherwise known for his classificationof plants and chemicals.32 Bacon sharpens his arguments against the loosenessof Gilbert’s experimental inferences, whom he lumps with the alchemists.Experiment, as represented by the alchemical practice of repeated heatings andrefinings, is not enough to establish a broad basis of knowledge; wide comparisonsof similarities and differences should take one further. He observestoo that narrowly seeking immediate practical results does not pay off, anddeprecates “idle magical ceremonies” of just the sort that Raleigh and hisassistant Harriot were reputed to carry out in their notorious “School ofNight” (New Organon 52.392, 349; Gatti, 1989). Bacon too was an offshootof the network of empiricists and occultists which gathered around the court;but he was an offshoot of opposition, critically assessing the others’ shortcomings,and building his critique into a general method.The real distinction of the Elizabethan court was not scientific but literary.Sidney, Marlowe, Spenser, and Shakespeare were already famous in the 1580sand 1590s. The literary and philosophical-scientific networks are connected,Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 565as we see in Figure 10.1; Bacon’s rival Raleigh in particular was close to theavant-garde poets and was a successful poet himself. And it was back throughthis network, in the early 1580s, that Bruno made contact with Sidney and hiscircle while propagating his astral magic at London and Oxford. Bacon toowas first inducted into intellectual life through the Sidney circle around thepolitical patronage of the earl of Leicester (Martin, 1992: 24–38). Bacon’screative energy was set off by the literary scene; his first and greatest famecame with his Essays in 1597, and he expanded them throughout his career,though incorporating in them hardly a mention of his scientific project.Bacon personifies the situation at the court, pursuing opportunities inliterature, science, politics, switching courses as the occasion arises. His distinctiveimpact derives from the blends he makes of these elements. His literaryprose has the rich pungency of poetry and the aphoristic bite of a politicalrealist. He writes on a unified empire of knowledge like a consummate courtieroffering intellectual conquests to the throne; he visualizes a centralized directoryof research as if patenting a government monopoly to be delegated tohimself. His intellectual ambition knows no bounds; he expects that his Tablesof Difference will produce the axioms not only of nature but also of politicsand ethics, of logic and mind. Rising above the special sciences, he visualizesa Philosophia Prima of principles holding good across fields as diverse asphysics and morals (New Organon 127.371; De Dignitate 412–414). Aftermany machinations, his political career peaked with the chancellorship, thenquickly and inevitably fell. His empire of knowledge too remained moregrandiose than can be realized. But Bacon’s ideology, like his prose style, makesone of the great conquests in the realm of intellectual reputation, attaching hisname to the structural transformation of his age.Descartes is a structural parallel to Bacon in a number of respects. Bothacquired first-rate reputations in disparate fields, Bacon in philosophy andliterature, Descartes in philosophy, mathematics, and for about a century inscience; he too established the criterion of style in his vernacular language, thefamous “Cartesian clarity” of French prose. Multiple participation acrossintellectual fields is not unusual throughout world history, but multiple leadershipof this sort is very rare; where networks overlap, it is usually becausethe stars in one are minor contributors to the other. Here is a another sign thatintellectual networks were realigning on a large scale. The setting of a vernacularprose style as well implies a crucial moment of transition in the means ofintellectual production.33The content of Descartes’s thought varies as his network position differsfrom Bacon’s. He was much less of a politician (although he received patronagefrom Richelieu), and less surrounded by glamorous literary circles. He was alsomuch more closely connected with current religious movements; he was both566 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsencouraged on the Catholic side and sought after by the Protestant standardbearersfrom the House of Palatine, and was visited by reformers such asComenius. Descartes was inducted into science through the Dutch network ofmathematicians and experimenters, Stevin, Snel, and Beeckman. Of crucialimportance, Descartes was sponsored by Mersenne’s circle, the center of organizedscientific correspondence; Mersenne arranged debates to publicizeDescartes’s philosophy and treated him as the intellectual leader of the newmovement.Descartes played this role not because of preordained genius, but becauseby the accidents of geography he fell into the maximally effective combinationof network connections. His beginnings were undistinguished, a boy from theminor provincial nobility in a small town in Poitou; but he was sent to thecollege newly founded nearby at La Flèche, the spearhead of Jesuit educationalexpansion in France, where he was a fellow pupil with Mersenne. Then camevarious travels as a military freelancer, which happened to bring him intocontact with the Dutch scientists. This may have struck a chord because ofDescartes’s background connection with Viète, the greatest French mathematicianof the previous generation.34 Soon after, in 1619, Descartes had hisfamous dreams in which he envisioned a great system of mathematical philosophy.In mathematics, Descartes plays the role of synthesizer of prior achievements.He builds on Viète’s work, but pushes it to explicit statement on ahigher level of abstraction.35 The work of Cardano and Viète in the theory ofequations is turned into a machinery; the use of geometric methods for algebra,and vice versa, becomes formulated as a normal technique. As he does in prosestyle, Descartes sets the standard for mathematical notation. His originality isin his synthesis; most of the techniques of equational notation were scatteredin commercial textbooks, while many of the advanced problem-solving techniqueswere still expressed verbally by leading mathematicians. Descartesbrings it all together and transmutes it into an essentially new thing, a philosophicalmathematics.Descartes’s contribution to the scientific revolution is also a matter ofsynthesis. Like Bacon, he was a propagandist for the future development ofscience; he believed that he could show the method by which all scientificproblems could eventually be solved. Descartes proposed to do this by derivingscience from the techniques of mathematics. The result was that he downplayedthe empirical side of science. This was not through lack of familiarity, thecounterpart to Bacon’s unfamiliarity with forefront mathematics, but becauseDescartes’s principal network resource was his mathematics, which he wishedto use to build a philosophy of complete certainty. His method, beginning withclear and distinct ideas and proceeding through regular deductive steps to in-Cross-Breeding Networks and Rapid-Discovery Science • 567controvertible conclusions, was a generalization of mathematical argument. Inusing it to build a science of the materially extended world, Descartes missedthe significance of empirical measurement and inductive mathematical principlesin physics; he went so far as to dismiss Galileo’s law of gravity because itwas merely empirical.36 Descartes’s methodological pronouncements missed theactual procedures of the scientific revolution as badly as Bacon’s. Nevertheless,Descartes’s deductive system became for a generation or more the leadingemblem of the “mechanical philosophy”; his Principles of Philosophy in 1644was the most comprehensive statement across the range of science, incorporatingeverything from physics, chemistry, and physiology to celestial mechanicsinto a single materialist system. Especially on the Continent, Descartes’sscience became the rallying point of the core scientific network, even as itsdiscoveries moved beyond him.Descartes had no intention of retaining philosophy as a discipline distinctfrom science; metaphysics was merely to contain the fundamental axioms fromwhich the scientific conclusions were to be deduced (Descartes, [1644] 1983:xxiv). What makes Descartes dominant for the intellectual network is not hisoriginality but his clear arrangement of his materials. The pieces of his argumentwere lying about in contemporary discourse. The skepticism whichDescartes used as his famous starting point had been prominent both in theprevious generation and in his own. Montaigne had made it famous; this wasa typical appearance of skepticism in a period when the intellectual field wasovercrowded and no position was able to command much following. In anotherdirection, we find the fideist use of skepticism; Descartes’s teacher at LaFlèche, the Jesuit Veron, used it in famous polemics against the Protestants.But Descartes turned the weapon to an entirely different strategy, to eliminatehis predecessors on the intellectual field and clear the grounds for the indubitableaxioms from which secure knowledge could be built. Even this strategywas not unique; Mersenne’s friend Gassendi had begun his career around 1621by wielding skepticism against the Aristoteleans and occultists (Popkin, 1979:100). Closer still to Descartes’s approach, Campanella had previously arguedin 1591 that philosophy begins in universal doubt, which is resolved by thecertainty of self-consciousness (EP, 1967: 2:11–12). But Campanella had notexploited this opening with the single-mindedness of Descartes; Campanellahad gone on to argue for empirical knowledge on the claim that the knowerbecomes transformed into the object known through intuition, whereas Descartesinvoked a mathematical standard and hence the prestige and resourcesof the mathematical revolution.Another crucial resource of Descartes was the scholastic philosophy thathe claimed to supersede. His procedures of universal doubt and self-evidentcertainty enabled him to dispense with textual references, though his use of568 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsAnselm’s ontological proof of God is obvious, and it is not improbable thatDescartes knew of Augustine’s prior use of the cogito against skepticism. Whatwas important for Descartes was that he could proceed through a chain ofdemonstration which led to the knowledge of substance, and thence of attribute,bodily extension, and the properties of material objects, which made upthe contents of his science. (This is developed most explicitly in Principles1.51–76.) Not only did this procedure draw on some of the leading conceptionsof scholasticism; but also Descartes made his move at just the time whenscholastic philosophy was being modernized in its home camp. Suarez, themost famous of the Jesuit thinkers, had recently formulated metaphysics as anindependent field rather than a commentary on Aristotle. The term ontologyfirst appears in 1636 in scholastic circles—almost simultaneously with Descartes’sepoch-symbolizing Discours de la Méthode—reflecting Suarez’s positionthat being as such is the first philosophy, before theology and before thecategories and contingent contents of experience. Not only is this approachimplicit in Descartes’s starting point; Descartes also carried Suarez’s DisputationesMetaphysicae (1597) on his travels, although he virtually never citedSuarez or any other scholastic (EP, 1967: 5:542; 8: 30–32).If we defocus from Descartes personally, we can see that the “philosophicalrevolution” which set off modern philosophy was a transformation, not anabolition, of the medieval field. Descartes’s ideology of a new beginning hidesthe revival of a long-standing metaphysical problem space. Spinoza, Leibniz,Wolff, Kant—the whole tradition of “rationalism” is not merely Cartesian; alldraw heavily on a purified scholasticism. The new era of philosophical creativitybuilds upon the capital of the older era, even as the energy of creationcomes from a new set of tensions structuring the intellectual community. Thespace which constitutes philosophy does not disappear when the techniques ofrapid-discovery science give the latter heightened noticeability and prestige.From now on philosophers are concerned to negotiate and define their boundarieswith science, much as they were previously concerned with their boundarieswith theology. Both borders now become the external sources of action inmodern philosophy.