CHAPTER 11£Secularization and PhilosophicalMeta-territorialityThe shifting power of the church was bound to change intellectual life. Thiswas the material base on which most intellectual networks had centered, andthese networks would necessarily respond to the closing of some opportunitiesand the opening of others. The intellectual revolutions were not simply a matterof breaking down the alliance of church and state which had imposed authoritariancontrol over the limits of thought. In the narrow sense, the liberalizationof thinking had less effect on creativity than one might suppose. Many episodesof creativity had gone on within the authoritarian church, and whenliberalization came, the most extreme freethinkers were not generally the mostinnovative, in either philosophy or science. Often their products were narrowand banal, while greater subtlety in constructing philosophy came from theconservatives defending religion, or in cautious halfway houses. Freedom ofthought is a wonderful thing; but it is realistic to recognize that it is not themain engine of creativity.Nor can we attribute the major changes to Protestantism. For one thingthe timing is wrong. Luther nailed up his theses on the Wittenberg church doorin 1517; by 1560 the major Protestant sects and the lines of the nationalchurches had been established. But the thought of the 1500s still moved largelyin well-worn paths: Humanists, Aristoteleans, scholastics, Cabalists, mystics.The big reorganization of philosophy did not come until the mid-1600s. Ofcourse there were Protestant thinkers; but they were mainly concerned withtheological issues and biblical texts. Erasmus, Luther, Melancthon, Calvin,Schwenckfeld, and Franck do not constitute a revolution in philosophy. TheReformation increased the particularistic emphasis in thought, not the abstractlevel where philosophical and scientific creativity takes place.The Protestant-centered line of argument rests on two false premises: thatreligious control is inherently antithetical to intellectual innovation, and thatProtestantism is more liberal or less authoritarian than Catholicism. Thesecond was certainly not true at any time before 1700. The notion that it was570so became part of Protestant propaganda after the condemnation of Galileoin 1632. But Servetus had been burned at Geneva in 1553; Grotius wascondemned to life imprisonment by the orthodox Calvinists in Holland in1618, and escaped to Catholic France; Bayle was dismissed from his chair atthe Protestant academy in Rotterdam in 1693 under theological attack. Becauseintellectual history written in English or German has been under the sway ofthe Protestant viewpoint, we are not prepared for the idea that Spain at theend of the 1500s was more of a creative center in philosophy than England orGermany (see Figure 9.7). We miss the blunt fact that Galileo and his scientificfaction in Italy were based in Jesuit and papal networks, and that CatholicFrance was the center of gravity of the leading philosophical networks fromthe generation of Montaigne to that of Malebranche. It was by contact withthis network that most outsiders, from Hobbes to Leibniz, had their creativitysparked. Catholic monks and priests ranged from Bruno and Campanella toArnauld (a Sorbonne theologian), Malebranche, and Bossuet.In science the picture is more mixed across Catholic-Protestant lines. Copernicuswas a Catholic church official, Gassendi and Mersenne were priests,Clavius and Cavalieri Jesuits, Torricelli and Viviani Jesuit pupils, Pascal aJansenist convert. The men who made the mathematical revolution—Cardan,Tartaglia, Viète, Descartes, Fermat—were all Catholics. On the Protestant sidewe can muster Brahe, Kepler, Napier, Gilbert, Stevin, and Snel; Harvey was aProtestant who studied at the Catholic university of Padua. When we come tothe generation of the Invisible College, there is a more consciously Protestantidentity, not surprising during the English Commonwealth; but this groupgenerally consists of moderates and opponents of the Puritan extreme, whostructurally were closely linked to their Catholic counterparts on the Continent.Our long-term comparisons ought to have prepared us for the idea that scienceis theologically neutral. Among the Muslims it had practitioners in virtuallyall theological factions. In medieval Christendom we find science incorporatedin the worldviews of Victorines and Albertists, Thomists, Scotists, and nominalists,among both Averroists and their persecutor Peckham; indeed it is hardto find a significant university philosopher who did not make room for science.Among the Greeks, science was compatible with Sophists, Platonists, andNeoplatonists, Aristoteleans, Epicureans, Stoics, and even some branches ofmedical Skeptics. Science is not necessarily theologically controversial, andmany different philosophical camps can incorporate it.Of course the Catholic Church was capable of being authoritarian; we seethis in the torture of Jews by the Inquisition in Spain, the prohibition of dellaPorta’s writings by the Inquisition in 1592, the burning of Bruno in 1600 andof the Averroist Vanini in 1619, the restrictions on Galileo in 1613–1616 andhis condemnation in 1632. There are episodes throughout the century: JesuitsSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 571hounding Gassendi and Arnauld, Bossuet persecuting the Oratorian RichardSimon in the 1680s and the mysticism of Fénelon and Mme. Guyon in the1690s. But intellectual creativity is driven by conflict, and much of the innovativenesswithin the Catholic world was due to the existence of a steadybalance of internal conflicts. Thus della Porta, no outsider but a Jesuit laybrother, was taken off the Index in 1598 and subsequently went on to participatein the scientific Accademia della Lincei established at Rome under the eyesof the pope in the early 1600s. Campanella had been imprisoned by the Spanishat Naples from 1599 to 1626; when he fled it was to the pope, who in turnsent him to royal protection in France. Galileo was alternatively feted andwarned in Rome; his sentence was soon commuted into house arrest, amountingto an aristocratic patronage arrangement which allowed him to continuehis researches. What we see here are the twists and turns of contending forceswithin Catholicism. The church had a rich lineup of competing bases, eachsufficiently elaborated so that there was room for intellectual maneuver.By contrast, the Protestant world often gave less autonomous space for intellectuals.Especially where the Reformation found a strong local power base,the church was prone to be dogmatic. The Calvinists, with their fusion ofchurch and political community, represented an extreme authoritarian milieu.Local self-rule here meant that the means of controlling opinion were especiallydirect and immediate. Perhaps now we can see the logic in the fact that theleading edge of the philosophical revolution was not only Catholic but fromthe sector that was most explicitly anti-Calvinist. If the Descartes-Mersennecircle is the network core, notice where it derived its impetus and sponsorship:the most famous teacher at La Flèche when Descartes and Mersenne werestudying there was Francois Veron, who became the king’s official anti-Calvinistdebater (Popkin, 1979: 70). Descartes’s philosophical career was launchedin 1628, when he was encouraged by Cardinal Bérulle, the French anti-Calvinistleader, to develop his system. Descartes’s weapon, the use of skepticalarguments to clear the ground for certainty, was a piece of cultural capitalinherited from the previous generation of French thinkers; and here we findPierre Charron, Montaigne’s friend, who was not only a skeptical fideist butalso a militant anti-Calvinist. In the crucial period of the philosophical revolution,it is closer to the mark to see Catholic intellectuals playing the liberatorsagainst the image of the Calvinists as anti-intellectual authoritarians.The Protestant Reformation was another act in the long-term struggle overchurch organization which had been going on since 1300, a struggle full ofschisms, anti-popes, heresies, and reformers. In some respects the Reformationwas a backward movement against secularization, for the Catholic Church wasan international organization in tension with the consolidating national states,while the successful Protestant movements represented a downsizing of the572 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathschurch to the state (sometimes the city-state) level, and hence a fresh fusion ofreligion with political power. In a larger organizational frame, the Protestant-Catholic struggle added another dimension of conflict to the underpinnings ofintellectual life; for several generations it was Catholic intellectuals who werebest positioned to take advantage of this.Secularization of the Intellectual BaseSecularization is more structural than doctrinal. Secularization does not meanthat no one is concerned with religion any longer. Religious movements maystill flourish, but now they become private movements. Secularization meansremoving control of intellectual production from the authority of the church.That authority had been backed up by the coercive power of the state; churchand aristocratic rule were organizationally intertwined. The same familiesmade careers in both; church property was a portion of aristocratic property;in daily life the church provided the means of ritual production, enacting theceremonial impressiveness of the political classes. Accordingly, secularizationbegan as a type of political revolution; as with all revolutions, its structuralkey was breakdown at the top, caused by internal struggle among the elites,and brought to a crisis by costly escalations and exhaustion of resources.1Secularization was the result of stalemate. The papacy itself first underwentan insidious secularization during the Renaissance period, for it was a centerof worldly wealth but also uncontrollable worldly debts (above all from itsuntenable geopolitical position); its far-flung networks and its riches made itthe center of factional strife and the target for plundering by adventurers. TheReformation translated the strife and plunder to a new level—wholesale confiscationand religious war. In each phase the structural pattern is the same:conflict among church-state elites, politicized churchmen and politicians withreligious slogans on their tongues, whose protracted struggles eventually exhaustthe power of the church, materially and emotionally. Ritual impressivenessand the capacity for legitimation are lost as the struggle winds down inpolitical maneuver and compromise. In sociological conflict theory, the processof exhaustion and de-escalation of conflict is as important as the originalmobilization and polarization.On the macro-level, the structural situation of church politics was a balancedconflict of cross-cutting powers, a gridlock of political alliances andreligious factions. That was the formula for political stalemate, and, becauseof the exhaustion of resources as conflict escalated in this unwinnable situation,for eventual breakdown of the old church-state. But with one added ingredient:it was also the formula for intellectual creativity which we have seen in somany parts of the world, the intersection of rival circles at a center of attention.Secularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 573The Catholic world was the intellectual center during this period of churchbreakdown and exhaustion because it remained the cosmopolitan center. Thatwas its structural advantage over the parochial national churches of the Protestants;that is why English and German intellectuals made their key networkties to the Paris of Richelieu and Mazarin.Balance of power among cross-cutting networks had effects at three differentlevels. The exhaustion of politicized church conflict led to secularization,the gradual neutralization and downgrading of the role of the church in thestate, and the loss of church control over the means of intellectual production.For intellectuals, cross-cutting networks were the formula for a period ofcreativity. The stars, such as Descartes and Leibniz, are the persons situated atthe nodes among the inner circle of circles. The character of ideas was alsoaffected: the cosmopolitan networks, especially during the time of politicalcompromise when particularistic doctrines were tainted with the failure offanaticism, drove up the level of abstraction which constituted the terrain ofphilosophical discovery. Religion turned universalistic; once again, as in theSpain of Averroës and Maimonides, philosophers provided a religion of reasonbeyond sectarian strife. But this too was doomed by the structural shifts ofsecularization; no religious doctrine, even the most universalistic, could recoverthe dominance once held by the old state-enforced faith. Depoliticization ofthe church opened an inner space for intellectuals to pursue their own puzzles.Philosophy recovered from its eclipse, launching a new era in the higher regionsof metaphysics and epistemology.Geopolitics and Cleavages within CatholicismSpain was an early center of intellectual ferment because it was the first greatstate power and the dominant force in the Catholic world. The creation of themodern state structure was largely a matter of geopolitics and military organizationand of the internal fiscal structures to support it. Spain was the first tocarry out the military revolution, shifting to a disciplined and centrally armedinfantry; along with this went intensified struggle with the landed nobility overthe increased fiscal requirements of the state. Religious organizations wereentwined with both sides; the Inquisition, the monasteries, the universities, thechurch lands, which made up almost 50 percent of Spain (Wuthnow, 1989:34), were simultaneously places where aristocrats made their careers andresources the government grasped for its own power. This tug-of-war wastaking place not between haves and have-nots, but between rival ways oforganizing at the top; this meant that there would be factions rich in resourcesin the heart of the church itself, a major ingredient for intellectual action.Spain of the 1500s was becoming the first great European empire, expand-574 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsing simultaneously with the unification of the Iberian kingdoms, the conquestof the Americas, and dynastic marriages and alliances which brought it theNetherlands, Austria, and a string of territories up the eastern border of France.Not least was its expansion into Italy, building on its possessions in Sicily; thiswas driven by rivalry with the French, the other great consolidating post-feudalstate. Spanish and French armies marched back and forth from Milan toNaples from the 1490s to 1530, liberating and sacking Rome on the way. Thepope was reduced to maneuvering for allies, perhaps the main reason whycentral religious authority was broken at last during these years by the LutheranReformation. From 1530 down to 1700, large parts of Italy weredirectly annexed to Spain, and the rest, including the Papal States along withTuscany and Venice, were uneasy regions of mixed resistance and acquiescence.Here was a major cleavage within the Catholic power, and one reason whyNaples suddenly became a center of intellectual action—Telesio, Bruno, Campanella,della Porta—embroiled in movements against the Spanish occupationwith intermittent support from the pope.France and Spain remained locked together in the north by their geopoliticalconflict. The Spanish Habsburgs hemmed in France on every border. The LowCountries, “the cockpit of Europe,” became the equivalent of a buffer zone ofshifting political fragments, and this made it more vulnerable to religiousdecentralization in its most extreme, Calvinist form. This is ironic only if wethink that a military power ought to be able to impose its religious orthodoxy;in fact the huge resources of the French and Spanish states allowed each tocheck the other, including their efforts to dictate religious policy. As Spaineventually became the standard-bearer of the Counterreformation, France wasdriven into the surreptitious policy of supporting Protestants. Geopolitics refersnot merely to dominance by the strongest state but to the pattern of relationsbetween rivals’ resources. As Spain became the Catholic authoritarian state,France became the center of Catholic liberalism. And the Netherlands, for allits tendencies toward Calvinist authoritarianism, by the 1600s had become thecenter of religious war-weariness and the home of cosmopolitan movementstranscending religious factions.The Spanish Intellectual EfflorescenceAlthough Spain eventually settled into a hard-line effort to enforce Catholictraditionalism, this did not happen before several generations of internal struggles,which brought intellectual creativity as a result. Spain was not automaticallyanti-Reformation, especially since it had its own military and politicalproblems with the pope over its Italian policy. Robert Wuthnow (1989: 26–35,102–113) has shown that the landed aristocracy derived its strongest legitima-Secularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 575GEOPOLITICAL CRISIS OF THE SPANISH-HABSBURG EMPIRE, 1559 (From McEvedy, 1972, p. 33)tion from participation in the old Catholic ritualism, and this faction wasstrong enough in Spain to defeat the new state-centered actors and choke offmovement toward all-out Reformation. Nevertheless, organizational resourceswere shifting, especially during the great expansion of empire in the 1500s,and the people closest to these organizational changes became open to newways of combining intellectual capital and new forms of generating emotionalenergy. That these changes continued to be defined as “Catholic” meant thatthere was no overt break from the papacy and no radical decentralization ofchurch authority. In most other spheres of content and practice, innovationswent far.The Jesuits were the vehicle of much of this innovation. The movement wasorganized by the nobleman Ignatius Loyala (López), invalided from the Spanisharmy, who turned in 1522 to the traditional religious practices: pilgrimage,conversion of infidels, zeal in caring for the sick, personal austerity. As hisreputation grew, Loyola began to transform the monastic life, abolishing choir,prayers, seclusion, and distinctive uniforms. The Jesuits criticized magic, legends,and the worship of saints. Their initial purpose was to become missionariesin the world-system just then expanding under Iberian lead. But universitieswere undergoing a sudden boom in Spain, and Loyola followed the flowof current excitement in seeking his recruits. Adopting the ideal that missionariesshould be the best trained of the church, he studied at the elite Spanishuniversities of Alcalá and Salamanca, and then at Paris, where in 1534 heorganized the Society of Jesus with a few companions. By Loyola’s death in1556, it had 1,000 members; in the next century it had over 600 colleges andacademies and was the largest educational institution in Europe (Heer, [1953]1968: 26–27; O’Malley, 1993: 200–242).The timing of the Jesuit movement strikingly parallels the Reformation.Loyola’s conversion was almost contemporary with Luther’s rebellion; thelaunching of the Jesuits in Paris in the 1530s happened at the center ofcontroversy over the new doctrines, and overlapped the presence there of JeanCaulvin (Calvin), who fled to Basel in 1536 to publish his Institutes of ChristianReligion, and established his theocracy in Geneva in 1541, the year afterthe pope approved Loyola’s order. In practice, these were both anti-monastic,anti-ritualistic reforms, although they found different political and organizationalniches in their relations to papal authority.The Jesuits’ growth was largely shaped by exploiting a niche resulting fromreorganization of the medieval educational system. The medieval universitieshad been guilds of teachers, licensing the higher professions of law, medicine,and theology, and giving a formal degree structure to the arts course whichprepared for them. It was a two-tiered system with universities as the top rung,while elementary literacy and grammar was provided in local schools attachedSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 577to churches and monasteries. We have already seen (in Chapter 9) the crisis ofthe universities which set in after 1300, as universities proliferated, enrollmentsdropped, institutions failed, and the licensing monopolies over the professionstended to break down. Especially in England and France, the core of the oldsystem, the universities, now shifted toward becoming collections of colleges,that is to say, boarding schools for undergraduate students, taking awayinstruction from the arts faculty. In the 1500s these university colleges beganto expand downward to incorporate the elementary Latin curriculum as well,that is, taking over the territory of the lower grammar schools. Medievalschools never had any strict age grading, and the colleges now had an agerange from 8 to 20. Most students were day students, who attended for onlya few years. The only remaining link to the old university structure was thatif a student did persevere all the way to the end of the course, he could takethe old M.A. degree; but the value of this credential was now disappearing.The medieval two-tiered system was now divided along a different line: insteadof grammar schools and universities with teenagers and young adultsin the latter, there were now colleges and professional faculties, with the formerextending down to children (Ariès, 1962: 195–237; Simon, 1966; Grendler,1989).As many towns began to set up colleges independently of the universities,the status advantage of university education disappeared. The Jesuits madetheir success by pushing this tendency to an extreme. Their colleges were freeand open to all social classes; in the 1600s, 50 to 60 percent of students weresons of artisans and the lower-middle class. Emphasis was still on Latin, theold high-status language of the educated. Within this frame, the Jesuits madea point of incorporating the newer culture offering science, literature, and thelatest modes of philosophy and of theological argumentation. We see anothersignificant overlap with Loyola’s presence at Paris in the 1530s: Ramus tookhis M.A. there in 1536 and began teaching a reformed, non-Aristotelean logic,mixing in Humanistic cultural capital by combining logic with rhetoric into asingle art of discourse. This became the model for textbooks in secondaryschools, spreading widely in the new Calvinist middle schools that grew up,especially in Germany and England, as an alternative to the traditional universities.The Jesuit colleges too adopted a version of the Ramus textbooks, suchas the one Descartes studied at La Flèche (EP, 1967: 7:66–67). Here again wefind the Jesuits paralleling on the Catholic side the organizational reforms thatopened up with the collapse of the medieval system of religious education.Educational reform provided the organizational basis for intellectual innovation.The Jesuit college in Rome became a center for high-level scientists andtheologians from the 1560s through 1620, including Clavius, Suarez, andBellarmine, and connecting to Galileo (Wallace, 1984). Perhaps most strikingly,578 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe Jesuits were at the high point of the intellectual creativity which broke outin the Spanish universities. Christian Spain had never been an intellectualcenter, except when Toledo in the mid-1100s had been the translation centerwith the Muslims; after the fall of the Córdoba caliphate in 1236, the onlyactivity of philosophical significance comprised the Jewish Maimonidists, Averroists,and Kabbalists, typically in an underground against the authoritarianismof Christian orthodoxy. There were two large medieval universities, at Salamancaand Valladolid, but these were never important in philosophy. So it israther abruptly in the early and mid-1500s that we find Spanish thinkers ofworld importance—Las Casas, Vitoria, and Soto—developing the theory ofnatural rights and international law.In network structure the Spanish intellectuals were a spinoff from the mainscholastic lineage at Paris.2 An early Spanish Humanist, Juan Luis Vives, likeLoyola went to Paris but did not return. By the mid-1500s, the leadingDominican Thomists were in Spain, and some of the northerners, such as theLatin stylist Buchanan, even sojourned there. The typical structural pattern ofcreativity emerges: lines of conflict among interlinked factions. The famousCarmelite reformers, the mystics Saint Teresa of Avila and John of the Cross,were attacked by the Dominican Melchior Cano; a proponent of scientificmethod, he saw these mystics as anti-intellectual reactionaries. Teresa wassupported by her confessor, Bañez, a Salamanca metaphysician and anotherDominican Thomist. In the heart of these conflicting networks emerged themost important Jesuit philosophers, Molina and Suarez.Molina formulated the distinctive Jesuit philosophy, the sophisticated calculationbordering on cynicism which would characterize much of the leadingsecular thought of the following generations. In 1588 Molina published aphilosophical path out of the dilemmas of predestination, the trademark theologicalissue of the Calvinists. He proposed a scientia media, a middle kind ofknowledge between Aquinas’s two kinds, God’s vision of concrete existencesand God’s knowledge of possibilities. The traditional Thomist position, thatman is physically predetermined by God to act freely, Molina charged, is onlya disguised form of determinism. Molina argued for God’s knowledge ofconditional future contingent events, and hence the cooperation of free willwith divine grace, bringing down on himself the attack of Cano and Bañez.The theological dispute had a wider significance, affecting the concept ofknowledge and hence of the emerging epistemological space within philosophy.Three generations later Leibniz was to draw on Molina’s scientia media toovercome the rigidities of Cartesianism (Brown, 1984: 26). Molina created atheology and ethics of probabilism: cognitions are less true the more generalthey are; concrete activity in the world always entails choices involving mixturesof greater or lesser evil consequences. Molina launched the famous JesuitSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 579emphasis on casuistry and situational ethics, a version of relativism. For theJesuits at this time, it was a liberal position against the authoritarians andabsolutists of both the Protestant and Counterreformation hard-liners. Crusadesand holy wars could not be justified, since no convictions could be certainenough to support no-holds-barred conflict; this led naturally into a criticismof the divine right of kings and of the absolute authority of the state. In thisMolina was followed by other Jesuits, including Bellarmine (Galileo’s critic)and Suarez.Culminating three generations of creativity in Spain, Suarez was the lastgreat scholastic philosopher; in subsequent Catholic circles his reputation wassecond only to that of Aquinas. He produced a massive synthesis of Scotistand Thomist metaphysics. The two high points of medieval philosophy, rivallineages for 300 years, were brought together just when the medieval structurewas in its final collapse. Here we find another case of creativity driven by therearrangement of the attention space, the creativity of intellectual allianceswhich we have seen exemplified in the grand pagan synthesis at the end of theancient Greek world. Suarez formulated metaphysics as the science of beingqua being; it comprises acts of existing, but also real essences, characterizedby non-contradiction. Breaking with Scotus, Suarez held that being is notunivocal but is a concept derived by analogy from the various kinds of being.3Suarez shaped the heritage of philosophy that was to be passed along to themodernists, who believed they were breaking with medieval thought.Suarez’s philosophy became the center of the curriculum in Catholic andmany Protestant universities (especially in Germany) for 200 years; and thistradition kept resurfacing whenever philosophy became consciously metaphysical.Wolff’s masterwork Philosophia Prima Sive Ontologica (1729) buildsexplicitly on Suarez (EP, 1967: 8:340–341). Wolff takes ontology as purelyself-contained argument over first principles, governed by the principle ofnon-contradiction. From thence he deduces the principle of sufficient reasonwhich governs physical, non-logical necessity: that in every case there must bea reason why something exists rather than not. This is a touchstone of Leibniz’sphilosophy as well, and it is implicit in Kant’s problematic of pure reason, thejustification of the synthetic a priori. When Schopenhauer at the beginning ofhis career proposed to overthrow constructive idealism and return to Kant, hisfirst statement was The Four-fold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason,with its explicit admiration of Suarez. Still later, Heidegger—the product of aCatholic seminary education—revived the ontological question, returning explicitlyto Scotus and overturning the Principle of Sufficient Reason by declaringthe logical unfoundedness of existence. This was one more move on theturf delineated by Suarez.Figure 10.1 shows Suarez contemporaneous with Bacon, Campanella, and580 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe scientific predecessors of Descartes. This is no anomaly. Once again creativitybreaks out simultaneously on rival sides of the field. The modernists ofthe scientific revolution scorned the old university metaphysics; the Spanishuniversity networks revived and carried forward the sophisticated abstractionsof the scholastic tradition. When the later generation of the revolutionists’network got over their anti-metaphysical ideology, it was Suarez’s line ofcultural capital that they continued.Expansion and Crisis of the Spanish UniversitiesWhy then did the Spanish intellectual world disappear again from view in the1600s? The easy answer would be the dominance of reactionary Catholicism;but this begs the question of cause and effect. Authoritarianism was not alwaysdominant, and the Inquisition itself was not uniformly reactionary in intellectualmatters; the first wave of liberalism at the beginning of the 1500s was ledby the Grand Inquisitor, Cardinal Cisneros, who supported the Erasmianreformers (Heer, [1953] 1968: 8–9, 13, 29–31). Cisneros founded the newuniversity of Alcalá, near Madrid, in 1509, with chairs for the ancient languagesand Bible study in the original texts; this Humanist move was balancedby founding chairs for Thomist, Scotist, and nominalist philosophy against thelate medieval tendency toward sectarianism and exclusiveness. Salamanca respondedby founding its own rival chairs, and from here the material base ofthe Spanish intellectual takeoff was established.That material base went through a boom and bust which coincided withthe rise and fall of Spanish philosophical creativity. Spanish universities of theMiddle Ages had been modest in number and size. In the 1400s the rate ofnew foundations picked up, reaching a deluge in the 1500s and early 1600s(see Table 9.1 and sources cited there). Of the 32 Spanish universities of thisperiod, three were overwhelmingly dominant. Salamanca alone had some6,000 students most years between 1550 and 1620—a figure matched by noprevious university except Paris in the 1200s, and by none subsequently untilthe late 1800s in Germany. Alcalá at its height had 2,500 to 3,500 students,Valladolid 2,000. Three or four other universities had as many as 600 students,while the others were small, reaching 60 to 70 students at most. At the heightin the late 1500s, approximately 3 percent of young Spanish males wereattending universities, and perhaps half of them took degrees. The immensityof this educational movement in a relatively small population needs to beappreciated. The United States, the modern pioneer of mass higher education,did not pass this ratio until 1900, modern England until 1950.4The underlying dynamic was a market for educational credentials. By thelate 1500s, the lower arts faculty had largely dropped out, displaced by theSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 581mushrooming Jesuit colleges. The universities now consisted almost entirely oftheology and law students, seeking places in church and state; Spain was thefirst society in history to be swamped by doctorates. This was a case of genuinecredential inflation; the arts degrees were displaced by advanced degrees after1550, with increasing emphasis on legal degrees as a ticket to administrativepositions in the government. The big three universities monopolized the market,with increasing inbreeding by particular colleges within them (Kagan,1974: 369; Elliot, 1970: 317). Graduates of Salamanca, Alcalá, and Valladolidheld a majority of top clerical and secular positions in the Habsburg administration,and a complete monopoly in royal councils and provincial courts ofjustice. Poorer provincial nobility flocked to the universities, causing enormousexpansion and an escalation of degree requirements, but without breaking themonopoly of the wealthy aristocrats holding favored connections. The resultwas a large floating population of penurious petitioners, living on hopes ofpatronage. The king even prohibited graduates of the non-major universitiesfrom coming to Madrid, but with little success. It is this atmosphere that isdescribed in the outburst of Spanish novels at this time, from Lazarillo deTormes (1554) to Quevedo and Cervantes in the early 1600s; and it was this“intellectual proletariat” which underlay the literary production.After 1620 the system went into decline. By 1660 student numbers hadfallen by half, with decline continuing into the early 1800s. The great outburstof foundations came to an end, and no new universities were founded after1620 until 1830. Of the 25 or more founded in the 1500s, half failed andmany of the others limped into the 1700s with 30 students or fewer. The majoruniversities fell in size along with the others. The expansionary phase hadcarried the intellectual life of Spain from the time of Cisneros and Las Casasdown to Suarez. With the downturn of the intellectual base, creativity driedup as well. Spain’s conservative authoritarianism was not congenital; it triumphedwhen organizational expansion ended.The Intersection of Movements in FranceThe Jesuits epitomize what could be constructed on this situation. There werenew material bases supporting multiple competing intellectual circles. Creativityis the making of new combinations by moving opportunistically throughsuch a structure, transcending narrowly polarized loyalties and borrowingfrom enemies for new purposes. The Jesuit order sprang from Spain, but itsintellectual base was far wider. Its schools now dominated education in theCatholic world. Their grand college at La Flèche was founded in 1607 in achâteau given by King Henri IV, along with sumptuous endowment, to celebratethe return of the Jesuits to France after their expulsion in 1595 (Chauvin,582 • Intellectual Communities: Western Paths1991). The intellectual and organizational leaders of the new philosophy,Descartes and Mersenne, came from among the students of the first cohort atthe Jesuit center. The list of former pupils of Jesuit schools is impressive,including Molière, Bossuet, Huet, Simon, and Bayle, down to Voltaire, Diderot,and Condorcet. Obviously the pupils are united more by their creative energythan by adherence to a theological line. The Jesuits are nothing if not activists,intellectual and political; they play realpolitik with their eyes open, perhapsthe main reason why they have a long history of expulsion from so many states.Descartes, who spent his life moving between the battle lines of the religiouswars and carefully choosing opportunities to publish new ideas, represents anextension of the Jesuit strategy into the heart of the intellectual turf.The Oratorians, founded in 1611 by Cardinal Bérulle, were opponents andrivals of the Jesuits (Heer, [1953] 1968: 189). They were ordinary secularpriests, a group whose status had always suffered in contrast to the monks,the friars, and now these new missionary and educational orders. Bérulle gavethem the dignity of their own order, with an emphasis on avant-garde education.Originally anti-Calvinist, they soon found their niche in intellectual space.Bérulle, a minister of state under Richelieu, gave Descartes protection andencouragement to develop his philosophy, whereas the Jesuits eventually abandonedhim despite his efforts to get their support.5 The Oratorians and theircollege at Juilly, near Paris, produced its own list of famous members andpupils over the succeeding generations: La Peyrère, Simon, Malebranche, Boulainvilliers,Montesquieu, virtually a lineup of avant-garde thought in Francefor over a century.France was now the center of Catholic cosmopolitanism and the crosscuttingpressures for secularization. Paris became the center at which themovements intersected. The Jesuits and Oratorians were there; anti-Jesuitmovements such as the Jansenists sprang up, contesting the leaders of theattention space.Mersenne’s circle became eminent by connecting all the movements. He puttogether the scientific network; he publicized Descartes and made Hobbes andArnauld known for the first time when he solicited their comments to bepublished with Descartes’s Meditations on the First Philosophy in 1641; heinitiated the youthful Pascal by giving him mathematics lessons. Gassendi, whowas driven from his position at the University of Aix in 1623 by the Jesuits,was recruited by Mersenne as collaborator on the strength of his recentskeptical attack on metaphysicians and occultists. Mersenne’s unifying strategywas to use science as a weapon against the Protestants and the dissolution ofchurch authority. Mersenne launched his correspondence circle in 1623; in thesame year he made his first move on the intellectual scene by attacking atheists,Deists, Cabalists, and astrologers, denouncing the English theosophist FluddSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 583as an evil magician. Mersenne and Gassendi used skepticism against what theysaw as the prime enemy of established religion, the Neoplatonist occultismwhich claimed to know the essences of the universe. Mersenne held up Galileo’sscience as an appropriately modest form of knowledge; eschewing essences, itsettled for a mathematical description of the pattern of sensory appearances.Mersenne held that mathematics provided a way to detect the principles outof which God had fashioned the universe, and that science, more than theology,was an effective basis for sermons (Schuster, 1980; Popkin, 1979; Joy, 1987;Dear, 1988).Gassendi used many of the same ingredients as Descartes: clearing the deckswith epistemological skepticism, proposing a system of physics, working inmathematics, for which he acquired the chair at the Collège de France in 1645.But he occupied the attention space too close to Descartes to keep up anindependent identity, and became famous mainly as the reviver of the oldEpicurean atomism. He criticized his rival Descartes with the skeptical argumentthat the criterion of clear and distinct truth needs a further criterion ofwhat is clear and distinct, but he was unable to stop the juggernaut of Cartesianrationalism, even its revival of the philosophy of essences. Gassendi’s reputationbecame assimilated to the growing camp of corporeal philosophy; thedoctrine of Descartes, who kept his distance on the periphery of the Mersennecircle, was propagated as its emblem.Raison d’État and Secularization by OpportunismThe intersection of clashing movements is a wonderful transmuter of fervorsand hostilities. Out of polarization, held together long enough in a balance,comes political realism and opportunism that borders on cynical secularism.Emblematic of the period is Richelieu, who figures prominently in the networksas patron and protector of Grotius, Comenius, and Campanella, of Descartesand the circle of the Libertins Érudits. A cardinal of the church, he destroyedthe French Huguenots in 1628 but subsidized the Protestants in the ThirtyYears’ War against Spain. Like his protégé and successor Cardinal Mazarin,Richelieu was backstage ruler of France, manipulating a weak king whilefighting off the plots and intrigues of the nobility. This subordination ofreligious fanaticism to political opportunism has a long history. Henri IV, thepatron whose coat of arms is on the Jesuit college at La Flèche, was theHuguenot king who converted to Catholicism with the words “Paris is wortha mass.” After Richelieu’s death in 1642, the premier patron of intellectualswas the duke of Condé. He was the military commander of the French armiesagainst Spain in the 1640s, but eventually went over to the Fronde, thedomestic uprising of aristocrats against Mazarin’s centralizing hand; defeatedin 1653, he became a general in the Spanish army until he was defeated by the584 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFrench in 1659—with the help of Cromwell’s troops practicing a Protestantversion of realpolitik. Nevertheless, Condé made his peace with the king, hadhis estates restored, and went on to lead the French army again against bothCatholic Spain and Protestant Holland. The recipients of Condé’s patronageare an amazing assortment—the pre-Adamite heretic La Peyrère, who servedas his librarian; the Libertins Érudits; Molière, Racine, and the court literaryworld—while later in his life Condé switched from scoffing to hosting conservativedefenders of devoutness such as Bossuet and La Bruyère.This side-switching is a structural key to the cosmopolitanism and thecreativity of the time. French alliances with England and Sweden at the heightof the religious wars made France the nexus of religious politics; there was nodomestic tolerance for Protestant true believers, but an extension of traditionalCatholic rationalism was acceptable. Dangerous connections were open tothose who were willing to seek them out. Once again Descartes carried off theprize. He began as a professional soldier, enlisting in 1617 on the side of PrinceMaurice of Nassau, champion of the Dutch Calvinists; in 1619–20 he was inTilly’s army of the Catholic League and was present at the destruction of theProtestant stronghold at Prague. It was on these travels that Descartes madehis first contacts with Dutch scientists and had his famous dream—whilebivouacking with the Catholic army on the Danube—about mathematics asthe key to knowledge. This would be the pattern of the rest of his career, ashe moved back and forth between Paris and Holland, seeking cosmopolitanallies and evading dogmatists on all sides of the religious strife.The mental detachment resulting from this atmosphere permeates the period.The priest Gassendi wanted to defend religion but associated with thegroup around the aristocrat La Mothe Le Vayer, reputed a secret atheist; othersof these Libertins Érudits include Patin, rector of the medical faculty of theSorbonne, bastion of theological orthodoxy; Naudé, librarian to the cynicalRichelieu and Mazarin; and the freethinking satirist Cyrano de Bergerac.Moliere, a former pupil of Gassendi, was another member of the circle, andreflected a satirical tone in his plays. The most forthright expression of thisoutlook is the Maximes (1665–1678) of La Rochefoucauld. This high-rankingnobleman had intrigued against Richelieu in the 1630s, joined the Fronde overa slight from Mazarin, negotiated the release of Condé from prison, rebelledagain, made his peace, and recovered his estates. He retired into amusing hisaristocratic correspondents by exchanging cryptic sentences, distillations ofcynical wisdom on the self-interest and moral self-deception of mankind. Yethis collaborator, Mme. de Sablé, was a Jansenist sympathizer, a resident atPort-Royal in the 1650s, and La Rochefoucauld himself became an intimateof the religious authoritarian Bossuet. The cynical outlook was rationalized ascompatible with religion by showing the sinfulness of the world.6The Jansenist movement began as fervent rather than cynical, but itsSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 585theological struggles had as their most famous result the secular philosophiesassociated with their retreat at Port-Royal. Jansen died in 1638 as a Louvaintheologian, just as he finished his treatise on Augustine. Casting the Jesuits, asfollowers of Molina, in the role of the Pelagians, Jansen repudiated the role offree will and stressed man’s intrinsic sinfulness and the irresistibility of interiorgrace. This was treading on dangerous ground, close to Calvinist predestination,which was the flash point for so many conflicts; it also provided a rallyingpoint for Catholic opposition to the power of the Jesuits (Heer, [1953] 1968:133–134, 194–195). Jansen’s work was immediately banned by the Inquisitionand the pope but acquired a following in France. Antoine Arnauld becamefamous in 1643 for his Jansenist arguments. Arnauld accused the Jesuits ofexcessive worldliness; they in turn had him expelled from the Sorbonne in1655.Arnauld withdrew to Port-Royal in the Parisian countryside, a conventwhich had been under the control of Arnauld’s family for 50 years; his oldersister Angelique had been appointed abbess there in 1602, at the age of 11.His father, too, was a long-term enemy of the Jesuits; as attorney general ofFrance he had led the legal defense of the University of Paris against them in1594, a trial culminating in the temporary expulsion of the Jesuits from France.The lovely estate at Port-Royal now became a retreat for Paris intellectuals.Pascal went there in 1655, repudiating his worldly life and turning frommathematics to the defense of religion. Nevertheless, the ties with secularintellectual life were not broken; Arnauld and Nicole wrote their Port-RoyalLogic in this period, following Cartesian methods. Like the rivals to the Jesuitsthat they were, the Port-Royal intellectuals adapted religious institutions tosecular opportunities. The visiting “Solitaires” opened a school outside thewalls of the abbey, which soon propagated its intellectual energy; one of thepupils whose career it launched was Racine, whose worldliness as a dramatistin the 1660s and 1670s offended the puritanism of his former teachers.The philosophical contributions of Pascal were a precipitate of these conditions.For several years he was a roué and a gambler, the latter providing thematerials on which he invented the mathematics of probability. This periodcame to an end with an emotional conversion in 1654, whereupon he joinedhis family members at Port-Royal. His famous defenses of religion are investmentsof a worldly cultural capital. “The eternal silence of these infinite spacesfrightens me”: this is the human dimension of the new scientist’s worldview,looking outward toward its boundaries (Pensées 206). And Pascal’s famouswager over the existence of God—a minimax solution of the costs of nonbelieftogether with the possible benefits of belief—is scandalously secular in tone.There is much human pathos in the attacks and retreats, the weariness andthe side-switching of this time. We associate enthusiasm with creativity and586 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsrespect the courage of one’s convictions among the highest of human qualities.But in association with power, fervent ideals mean polarizing conflicts, leadingto destructiveness and, in the eyes of an increasing number, cruelty and injustice.In this context opportunism starts to become a virtue. Whether we see itas cynicism or as tolerance, these are alternative gestalts for the same configuration.Whether we think Pascal and Descartes are calculating or sincere, theybecame great because they embodied the historical moment when such questionscould now be raised.Reemergence of the Metaphysical FieldThe Cartesian circle at Paris in the last third of the century was something ofa bringdown from the excitement of the previous generation. Its very routinizationindicates a crucial feature of the reconstituted intellectual world. Philosophyhad survived; it had not been replaced by science, nor faded away asa mere residue of religion. Descartes’s grand ambition failed, but left a setof problems and concepts distinctively defining philosophical turf. In fact,Descartes was not as philosophically radical as he pretended, drawing heavilyon scholastic cultural capital; and the Jesuit scholasticism of Molina andSuarez was prominent in many universities. But now metaphysics was practicedopenly among the modernists who were in the center of the intellectual attentionspace. Creativity proceeds by dividing that space according to the law ofsmall numbers. The Cartesians party was so victorious in setting the focus ofattention for the avant-garde network that its majority began to split intofactions, even disputing with Descartes himself.Descartes’s chief followers suffered the fate of epigones, being insufficientlydistinctive to have major reputations of their own. Rohault deducedthe existence of the self from eight self-evident axioms. Régis as systematicallyextended the consequences of the cogito, deriving from it 14 further irrefutableprinciples. The major religious conservatives also made their reputations onCartesian capital. The extreme fideist Huet used skeptical arguments againstthe cogito: since it consists of statements uttered in time, there is no guaranteethat the “ergo sum” is still true when it is uttered in a following moment. “Ithink therefore I am” means no more than “I thought therefore perhaps I was”(Popkin, 1979: 200). Foucher revived the skeptical Platonic Academy’s criticismof sense perception, eliminating Cartesian extended substance. Theseefforts to tighten up Descartes’s arguments, or to repudiate them entirely,attracted less attention than the more radical moves to divide up the revitalizedterritory of metaphysics.The Cartesian loyalists occupied the center of attention which everyoneattacked; their dualism of mental and material substance was the puzzle onSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 587which everyone focused. Around this were arrayed the occasionalists (Malebrancheand others), giving primacy to the spiritual side; at the other extremethe sensualists, giving primacy to material extension, most notably in Locke’sversion; a third major alternative was Spinoza’s monism; a fourth was Leibniz’smonadology, which combines mind and matter in each of an infinity of distinctsubstances. A fifth position, aloof from this array of positive systems, comprisedthe skeptics, rejecting all. If we add to this the Cartesian loyalists, wehave six positions, more or less the upper limit under the law of small numbers,the set of positions that can acquire attention at the same time. In fact therewere even more philosophies grappling for attention, and some were bound tobe squeezed out of the memory of subsequent generations. The 36 years from1674 to 1710 contained one of the biggest and most colorful outbursts ofmetaphysical systems since the early 1300s; the only other burst like it is thevariety of German Idealisms produced between 1780 and 1820. Berkeley waspart of the same generation of structural creativity (his chronological age isirrelevant, and his youthful creativity is explained by the network links affordinghim the opportunity to take advantage of the structural transformation ofthe intellectual field). Berkeley’s idealism is thus a seventh position on thecontinuum, outflanking Malebranche on the spiritual side. It is probably forthis reason that Berkeley ended up occupying the reputational slot on that sideof the field, becoming one of the classic philosophers while Malebranche’sreputation faded.7Malebranche accepted dualism but shifted the primacy back toward thereligious side. This was a natural enough combination of ingredients for ayoung priest out of the Sorbonne. As a member of the liberal Oratorians,around 1668–1674 he frequented the Cartesians, who lent him Descartes’sunpublished manuscripts. He seized on the major point of controversy, thedifficulty of a causal connection between mind and body, and in 1674 proposedan occasionalist solution. Evidently the link does exist. Malebranche took thisas evidence for the continuous intervention of God in the world; when a humanspirit wills, it is God who moves his or her body; going in the other direction,perception depends on God’s transmitting the motion of matter into the ideashumans experience. Malebranche defended the relevance of God in a timewhen secular intellectual life was spinning free. Malebranche was not the onlyreligious thinker who hit on the occasionalist route out of Descartes. Geulincx,who studied at Louvain with a Cartesian professor before converting to Calvinism,developed an occasionalist account of causality, denying the substantialityof created particulars; this was published only posthumously in 1688,after Malebranche had reaped the fame. Others in the Parisian network ofreligious thinkers found this slot as well; Cordemoy (who was associated withBossuet as reader to the Dauphin) and La Forge also gave an occasionalistsolution to the mind-body problem.588 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsMalebranche came to represent this position in the public eye as he wascaught up in a swirl of controversies with his most famous opponents: in 1683Arnauld polemicized with him over the implication that humans have no ideasof their own if they see all things in God; later Leibniz criticized Malebranchefor obscuring the scientific status of the laws of motion. On the other side hewas attacked by Fénelon and Bossuet. To make God the sole cause in theuniverse appears to eliminate free will, and Malebranche’s theological unorthodoxylanded him on the Index in 1690. This was hardly fatal to one’sintellectual reputation; but there was a deeper problem in reconciling the partyof religious orthodoxy with Cartesianism while solving the philosophical puzzleof how to relate two dissimilar substances. The intermediation of God ineffect provides a third substance. If one wishes to emphasize the spiritual side,Berkeley’s idealism is a cleaner route to that goal. If one is impressed withMallebranche’s conceptual tools, Leibniz provides a superseding version. Malebranchesharpened the problem not just of mind-body interaction but of howanything can act causally on anything. If we stick to observables, we find onlya succession, never a causal force; Malebranche gives the very image of billiardballs moving on a table that one later associates with Hume (quoted in Brown,1984: 84; also Lévi-Bruhl, 1899: 63–64). In the same way, it is unintelligiblehow a spirit can communicate with another spirit, except, Malebranche says,via God; and God’s intervention is necessary also to uphold the order of thephysical world. Malebranche left a heritage of puzzles that would be exploitedby others.The monistic path out of Descartes’s two-substance problem was taken bySpinoza, then given a distinctive twist by Leibniz. Both men encountered theCartesian network and its puzzles, each with ties to the international scientificcommunity, and each with strong motivations to transcend religious disputes.Jewish Millennialism and Spinoza’s Religion of ReasonSpinoza was formed in the midst of controversies at Amsterdam, when theopportunism of religious politics in Europe was at its height. The Jews hadbecome an important element in the larger intellectual scene. This was a rolethey had played in Muslim Spain during the 1100s, but never before inChristian Europe. Now the actors were mostly Portuguese Jews newly arrivedin exile, fleeing persecution by the Spanish Inquisition, which had been extendedto Portugal when that kingdom was incorporated into Spain in 1580.But Spanish Jews had been under pressure to convert or flee ever since thereconquest; the philosophical results had been particularistic Kabbalah, notuniversalistic doctrine. In the mid-1600s there was an additional factor fromthe Christian side: a growing interest in a universal religion pruned of dogmaticelements. Judaism was attractive on this score; leaving aside dietary and otherSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 589ritual, the theology itself is a simpler monotheism than Christianity. Someclaimed that Judaism was the universal religion arrived at by reason.Amsterdam Jewish circles divided among secularizing religion, synthesiswith Christianity, and defense of Jewish orthodoxy.8 In 1643 a Portugueserefugee, Isaac La Peyrère (la Peireira), launched a sensational thesis: the Messianicage was soon to begin, since it was heralded by the conversion of theJews. La Peyrère was an experienced side-switcher, a convert to Calvinism,living at the time in Paris under Condé’s patronage and in contact withthe Libertins Érudits; when he traveled to Amsterdam, the safest haven inwhich to publish his works, they were picked up by the Jews. In 1650 RabbiMenasseh ben Israel, an Amsterdam printer from a Portuguese refugee family,predicted the imminent coming of the Messiah when the Jews were spread overthe world. This must have seemed borne out by contemporary events, in thistime of forced conversions and a new diaspora; it blended, too, with scientificspeculation over new geographical discoveries, including the idea that the tribesfound in the Americas were the lost tribes of Israel. The fervor of contemporaryreligious politics in the Protestant camp contributed to the atmosphere in whichJewish millennialism appeared. In 1655 Cromwell, who believed that theCommonwealth was re-creating ancient Jewish theocracy, invited Menasseh toEngland.Meanwhile La Peyrère announced a more scandalous thesis: in 1655 heproposed that non-biblical peoples had existed before Adam, and the Bible isthe historical record of only one of the world’s people, the Jews. This pre-Adamite thesis was published in Amsterdam, where it was debated in aninterdenominational circle around Menasseh. Boreil, in touch with Cromwelland with the Invisible College of scientists forming in England, hosted thegroup and followed the millennial line that the conversion of the Jews waspenultimate to the coming of the Messiah. The young Spinoza attended theMenasseh circle and was expelled from the Amsterdam synagogue at the heightof these controversies in 1656 along with Ribera, who expounded the pre-Adamite thesis of La Peyrère.Spinoza took a third line between Jewish orthodoxy and millennial hopes,the stance of toleration and transcending partisan furor. Spinoza’s distinctivebrand of cosmopolitanism came from his additional network connection, theCartesian scientists. He expounded Descartes’s physics in geometric argumentin his first publication (1663), hoping to arrive at a self-evident demonstrationof rational philosophy as a basis for a universally acceptable theology. ButDescartes had brought no universal agreement, and Spinoza found the flaw inthe inconsistency of having two substances.9 One attraction of monism is thatproof of a single substance simultaneously unifies theology with mathematicalscience. This is a bolder path than Descartes followed; he was willing to leave590 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsconventional Catholic theology in place so long as he could reorganize philosophyalong scientific lines. Spinoza took over the space vacated at Descartes’sdeath; for Spinoza in Holland was still at the crossroads of the internationalscientific networks. But now it was a Holland becoming weary ofreligious conflict and de-ideologized with the settling of the Spanish war. Thedefeat of Protestant millennialism with the fall of the English Commonwealthin 1660 must have given a heady moment to hopes like those of Spinoza fora rational overcoming of religious differences. In this he was politically naive,and his position, the most thorough of all rational theologies, became synonymouswith the new brand of heresy as religious orthodoxies were reestablishedin power, above all in France.Spinoza’s main accomplishment was inside the core of the intellectualnetwork. Spinoza was the last and most extreme of those who hoped to deducescientific laws axiomatically; at the very same time, Huygens and the empiricalscientists were giving up this criterion of certainty. Spinoza’s eminence in theattention space came from his setting a new standard for ambition and boldnessin metaphysics. Untrammeled by religious orthodoxy, he was willing tofollow deterministic premises to their conclusions. Not only in his geometricmethod of argument but also in the breadth and consistency of his unificationof ontology, epistemology, and ethics, Spinoza demonstrates in extreme formwhat it is to have a philosophical system.Leibniz’s Mathematical MetaphysicsLeibniz took a more cautious approach on religion, but he was equally ecumenical.Coming on the scene at the end of the religious wars which ravagedGermany, he planned at first to reunify the Protestant and Catholic Churchesaround a common theology. To this end, he developed a universal combinatoriallogic and a calculating machine, which he hoped might be used by missionariesand which he dreamt would overcome religious disagreement (Brown,1984: 56–57). Leibniz was an ambitious seizer of opportunities, and he workedthe international networks more energetically than anyone else. Born into twofamilies of professors at Leipzig, the best of the medieval Germany universities,he tried the Rosicrucians, made the rounds of service to various Germanprinces, and got himself a diplomatic posting to Paris and London in the 1670s.Coming from Germany helped him break through the loyalties now becomingset among the second-generation Cartesians; and the German universities stillretained the traditional scholasticism which provides a key ingredient for newcombinations. Leibniz’s religious plans and his calculating machine were notwell received, but he soon found other grounds of activity. He met all theimportant circles of scientists and philosophers, picked up on the latest ideas,Secularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 591and quickly developed them into his own. He learned mathematics fromHuygens and from access to Pascal’s unpublished work; from hints of Newton’scalculus (and despite Newton’s guarded suspicion), he developed his ownversion (Hall, 1980; Hofmann, 1972; DSB, 1981: 8:149–168, 10:330). Overlappinginternational networks open opportunities and generate high emotionalenergy in the individual who takes the lead in this niche, the subjectivefeeling of momentum that comes from exploiting the first-mover advantage.Leibniz was so full of network opportunities that he hadn’t enough timefor all his projects, and many of them were left in fragments. Law, history,diplomacy claimed his most immediate attention. He took service with theduke of Brunswick and produced genealogical research that aided his patronin acquiring the Duchy of Hanover, from whence the family eventually (in1714) inherited the throne of England. When his employer’s daughter becamequeen of Prussia in a dynastic marriage, he used the connection to establishan Academy of Science in Berlin. More organizationally astute than Newton,Leibniz founded his own journal and found patronage for new scientific academies,through which his followers—the Bernouillis, l’Hospital, and Euler—made his mathematics dominant.Leibniz developed his philosophy in the course of his network’s concerns.His early training at Leipzig was scholastic, and reflections on Molina andSuarez become his distinctive intellectual ammunition.10 In Paris, Leibniz’sphilosophical connections were mainly with the anti-Cartesians, especiallyHuet and Foucher. He also traveled to seek out Spinoza in 1676 and spentseveral weeks reading his manuscripts. Leibniz became intimate with Malebrancheat the time when the latter’s famous work appeared. Soon after thebattle broke out between Malebranche and Arnauld, Leibniz developed hisown philosophy and broached it in correspondence with Arnauld, modifyingit as the result of Arnauld’s criticisms (Brown, 1984: 123; Broad, 1975).The point of entry was that Malebranche’s occasionalism had eliminatedhuman free will as well as human ideas. Leibniz intervened with points fromMolina and from the scholastic tradition. Discussions in late Thomist logicsuggested the principle “in every true proposition the notion of the predicateis included in that of the subject” (quoted in Brown, 1984: 74; Funkenstein,1986: 98–99). All true statements about an individual person, Leibniz continues,are contained in the essence of that person, including everything he hasdone and will do in the future. The individual essence is thus its own causality.But this also means that no essence can affect another; all are causally independent.This raises an extreme form of the problem of non-connectednessamong unlike substances, the central puzzle of the post-Cartesian field. Turningthe problem around, Leibniz notes that many true statements about an individualappear to describe his relations with other individuals; yet each is592 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscausally independent. This means that each individual essence reflects othersfrom its own perspective; extending links onward, each reflects the wholeuniverse.Leibniz is conservatively reinstating the doctrine of essences which Galileoand his movement had overthrown in physics in favor of mathematical descriptionof matter in motion. But contemporary science is part of Leibniz’sarmament as well. His calculus alerted him to another dimension beyond theconventional representations of matter in motion. When he says that eachsubstance contains traces of all its past and future states, he can visualize apoint moving along mathematical coordinates. Geometrically a moving bodyis indistinguishable from one at rest; hence there must be an additional quality,“living force”—later called “kinetic energy” (Broad, 1975: 65)—which impliesits past and future. A similar line of thought connects his calculus to thecontroversy over atoms and infinite divisibility. Descartes’s extended substancewas being criticized by Foucher as infinitely divisible, and hence not really asubstance at all, while atoms were rejected as incapable of making up acontinuum (Brown, 1984: 42). These problems were reinforced by recentdiscoveries by microscope of microorganisms, which led Leibniz and others tosuppose that there are infinite arrays of infinitesimals within each order of size.Leibniz’s calculus made it familiar for him to invoke a transcendent order ofreality, rather than the physical dichotomy of atoms versus infinitesimality.Leibniz reformulated all mathematical and metaphysical distinctions as qualitiesof a continuum. Rest may be conceptualized as infinitely slow motion,equality as infinitely small differences.11Borrowing from Spinoza and Malebranche, Leibniz proposed a coherentexplanatory system. The world is composed of an infinity of substances; eachis unique, each having an essence which contains logically and causally all thatit ever is. Leibniz accommodates atomism and microscopic biology by supposingthat visible bodies are made up of many such monads; he accommodatesliving organisms and the human soul by supposing that they too are monadson their own scale. He accepts Spinoza’s solution to the mind-body problemby positing that each substance is simultaneously mind and matter. But theseultimate entities are not bare atoms, interchangeable except for their positionsin time and space; each has its individual essence, the equivalent of DunsScotus’s haecceitas, the principle of individuation. They cannot be interchangeablein time and space, because time and space are not independently existingcontainers but are internal characteristics of the monads themselves, theirmodes of relating to one another.12 The relations among these self-subsistentmonads seem paradoxical, a mark of Leibniz’s inability to force through acomplete synthesis of his disparate materials. Nevertheless, the underlyingthrust of his argument may be interpreted as holding that the essence ofSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 593each—its logical definition—contains attributes which make conjunctions withthe attributes of others at the same time that it is particularly, indexically, itself.Leibniz expresses this in theological language, reminiscent of Malebranche, asa pre-established harmony set by God.But the system does not rest on the theology; it rests on Leibniz’s conceptionof a universal logic of all propositions. In his hands the concept of God becomesa way of referring to a world order of intelligible reasons. Omniscienceis the equivalent of an infinitely perfected science; omnipotence is subordinatedto the order of reasons. Leibniz’s system is the embodiment of all the networkties that he brings together. Its central ingredients are the sophistication ofmathematical science at the cutting edge of the new dynamics and infinitesimalcalculus, plus the accumulated scholastic metaphysics which had gone undergroundbefore the ideology of the modernists, only to reappear when itscultural capital became a key resource in the philosophical attention space.Rival Philosophies upon the Space of Religious TolerationIn the last generation of the 1600s, the Protestant world was becoming theleading edge of secularization in intellectual life. Earlier conditions were nowreversed. The Protestant styles of organizing religion were both more centeredon the national state and more decentralized to local congregations thanCatholicism. This meant that Protestant movements easily fused with dogmaticenthusiasm and political coercion. Nevertheless, the trajectory of politicalconflicts laid the grounds for a trend toward secularization. The greater dispersionof organizational resources for religious mobilization into politicsshifted the balance of power and eventually led to stalemate in the state’s abilityto coerce religious uniformity. This did not happen in every state, but inevitablywithin an array of religious conflicts across Europe, some regions would comeout at a balance of forces around the point of mutual exhaustion. Tolerationand secularization occurred not because any of the strong factions desired it,but because these forces exhausted themselves through their conflict. Secularizationset in as a process of de-escalation when the struggle for domination nolonger had the means to continue.This exhaustion of religious conflict occurred both between states andwithin some of them. The culmination of alliance-building was the ThirtyYears’ War between the Protestant Union and the Catholic League; its endingin 1648 left Germany devastated and Spain more deeply bankrupt than ever.At the same time, Spain had to give up its costly crusade against the DutchRepublic. One result was that France was no longer a captive of its anti-Spanishpolicy, and it could turn to defending Catholic orthodoxy; we find this in thegreater dogmatism of the French national church under Bossuet. If France594 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthereby became less of a world intellectual center from about 1680 to 1740,religious politics in Britain now made it a creative substitute.England was the site of some of the most vehement and multi-sided religiousconflicts. It had a centralizing monarchy which used the nationalizationof church property as a means of patronage; an old-line Catholic aristocracywhose status was tied to traditional church ritualism; and urban, mercantile,and artisan populations whose non-traditional community structures provideda fertile base for the decentralized Protestant congregations. Alongside thesehad emerged a newer gentry and aristocracy, based on new opportunitiesthrown out by the patronage of the crown dispensing honors and commercialmonopolies (Wuthnow, 1989; Hochberg, 1984; Stone, 1967). This last groupwas structurally opportunistic, capable of serving royalty in the cynical mannerof Francis Bacon, or turning against it to lead a rebellious coalition in themanner of Oliver Cromwell. The important point is that Britain (now includingnot only England but also Scotland and newly conquered Ireland) containedwell-entrenched resources for several factions, and these eventually fought oneanother to exhaustion. Britain became the philosophical center between thetime of Locke and Hume largely because religious and political stalemate wasreached there first.Secularization is not a zeitgeist but a process of conflict. Philosophicalcreativity occurs in the range of stances that emerge as intellectuals take uptheir new positions on various sides of the shifting balance of power. Toestablish this, let us go back to the period of the Civil War, when compromisewas most definitely not the condition of British life. There is the typicalopposition of intellectual extremes: at one end Hobbes and his thorough-goingmaterialism; at the other end the Cambridge Platonists.Hobbes’s position branched off from the Mersenne circle in Paris, whichhe encountered as a traveling tutor on the Continent during 1634–1637, andwhich he frequented while in exile in the 1640s. This connection set off hiscreativity, for although he had been associated with Bacon in the 1620s,Hobbes had produced little. Soon after meeting Gassendi and Galileo in the1630s, Hobbes developed a grand scheme to derive everything from the motionof bodies, including a system of government designed to overcome the turbulenceof the times. He first emerged in the public intellectual arena whenMersenne invited him to critique Descartes.13 Soon after Hobbes was writingin geometric argumentation; like Descartes, he too attempted an optics butfound more original grounds when he applied Galileo’s physics of motion topsychology. Hobbes gained his fame in just the territory that Descartes avoidedin his caution to stay away from political entanglements and keep fromantagonizing the religious establishment. Here political connections were determining;Hobbes was in the Royalist faction at a time when the religiousSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 595activists overthrew the crown. Drawing on the resources of his intellectualnetwork, Hobbes radicalized the “mechanical philosophy” and constructed ascientific materialism as a support for government authority and for the supremacyof the state over faith. In this mood of political showdown, he hadno desire to compromise with a soul substance; simultaneously he carved outa distinctive intellectual space for himself against Descartes and against thereligiously oriented scientists then forming the Invisible College.Hobbes’s connections with the king after the Restoration gave him protection,but his position was too offensive to religious policies to be accepted(Shapin and Schaffer, 1985: 133, 293–296). Hobbes’s creativity reflected theperiod of exile in the somewhat cynical atmosphere of Richelieu and Mazarin’sParis. But it was English politics that anchored him, as we can see by comparisonwith La Rochefoucauld’s Maximes, which were germinated around thesame time, in the late 1650s. La Rochefoucauld had much the same viewpointon self-interest as the springs of action; but he made no effort to develop hisargument into a system, and he ignored its consequences for politics. TheFrench version is a literary amusement, politely accepting the religious statusquo; the English version makes claims for an intellectual and political reorganization.In counterpoint to this materialism was the upsurge of mystical Neoplatonismat Cambridge. This circle was organized in 1633, as relations betweenParliament and king broke down and hysteria grew over the possible reestablishmentof Catholicism. The Platonists, like Cambridge University generally,were strongly identified with Puritans and the Commonwealth. Theirintellectual distinction was that they were a moderate offshoot of the Calvinists,inclined to Latitudinarianism and tolerance, downplaying doctrinal questionsin favor of morality and Plotinine contemplation of divine reality. Neoplatonismdid not make for very orthodox theology, since it undercut theparticularistic elements of dogma; and its previous appearance in Italy withFicino had a decidedly cosmopolitan slant. Under current conditions, though,the Platonists came to occupy a defensive stance against secular intellectualcurrents.The philosophical creativity of the group did not appear until after theRestoration, in the 1660s and 1670s. An impetus was the growing fame ofHobbes’s materialism. Ralph Cudworth, in The True Intellectual System of theUniverse (1678), took the offensive against Hobbes and Gassendi, declaringthat materialism reduces to sensationalism, and that the senses are too deceptive,as Plato showed, to be the basis of knowledge. Our true ideas are of thingsimperceptible to the senses, including the idea of a perfect Being. Earlier,Cudworth and More had been relatively favorable to the Cartesians, withwhom they had had friendly correspondence; but now they turned against596 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsDescartes as the enemy of religious faith. Cudworth rejected Descartes’s dichotomybetween spiritual and material worlds, in favor of a “ladder ofperfections in the universe” through which things are produced by a descentfrom higher to lower (quoted in Copleston, 1950–1977: 5:60). Henry More,who wrote in the form of poetic allegories, described the world as animatedby a world-soul, God’s instrument. This was not a rejection of scientificexplanations but a rival to the mechanistic philosophy then coming to the fore;the world-soul offered a non-materialist explanation of magnetism and gravity.More argued in 1671 that Descartes’s geometric interpretation of nature impliesthe existence of an absolute space; and this cannot be an attribute ofthings but is an intelligible reality in itself, a shadow counterpart of the Divine.Contrary to Descartes’s definitions, More asserts that not only matter but alsospirits are extended (Copleston, 1950–1977: 5:64; Funkenstein, 1986: 77–80).The Cambridge Platonists are structurally one of the pivot points of Britishintellectual life. From them we can trace the network in Figure 10.1 in severaldirections: on one side, Locke’s sensualist empiricism as well as Shaftesbury’srevival of innate moral ideas; on the other, the series of reconceptualizationsof religious turf represented by Newton and Berkeley. These trains of developmentshould not be too surprising, for the Platonists formulated most of theissues which Locke and Newton would develop, if with the significant reversalsof emphasis which are characteristic of chains of intellectual creativity. Cudworthpointedly raised the issue of sensualism; and he explicitly denied, usingthe very image that Locke was to make famous, that the mind is merely a“white sheet of paper that hath nothing at all in it, but what was scribbledupon it by the objects of sense” (quoted in Copleston, 1950–1977: 5:61). Ideasare not abstracted from objects but are merely awakened by them; nor doessensation give the essence of things or of scientific laws. Locke was to agreewith the last point but in a moderated form, giving up essences in favor of theprobabilistic knowledge yielded by the senses; for the other points, Locke couldhave found many of his formulations by reversing Cudworth’s position.14Creativity is structured by opposition.Locke was personally connected to the Platonist circle. Its leader, Whichcote(61 in Figure 10.1), was Locke’s favorite preacher in London. His friendsduring exile in Holland were their friends. In his later years Locke lived withCudworth’s daughter, Lady Masham (Fraser, [1894] 1959: xxxiii–xxxv). Likethem, Locke strongly favored religious moderation and toleration and opposeddoctrinal strife. This political stance shaped Locke’s entire career. Locke wasassociated with the innovative milieu of Boyle and the Invisible College atOxford in the 1650s, but these early scientific contacts did not arouse hisenergy, and his academic career was undistinguished; he left in 1667 to becomepersonal physician to the first earl of Shaftesbury, a position he held untilSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 597Shaftesbury’s death in 1683. Shaftesbury reminds us of an English version ofthe duc de Condé, the practitioner of timely alliance-switching. Shaftesburychanged sides twice during the Commonwealth, and negotiated for the returnof King Charles II under a program of toleration and amnesty to all sides. Withthe revival of the party of Catholic legitimacy under the Stuarts, he led theparliamentary opposition and fled to Holland in 1682 under a charge oftreason, shortly followed by Locke.Shaftesbury played the power game of religious animosities and factionsduring the Restoration, but his machinations flowed with the structural driftof the time. Opportunism and intermittent toleration was the most practicalpolicy for ending religious strife and its accompanying political turmoil. Lockeraised the lesson to the level of a principle. Social peace is possible only througha reasoned disengagement from religious fanaticism; and this means secularization.Locke announced his philosophy at just the moment when his politicalallies were making their triumphant return from Holland with the House ofOrange. Locke, as advanced in age as Hobbes was when he first beganpublishing his major works, was stirred to complete his first creative fruits:Essay on Human Understanding in 1688–89 (age 56–57), Letter on Tolerationin 1689, and Treatise on Government in 1690 (age 58).We cannot attribute Locke’s position simply to the cause of toleration. Thatposition was widely shared among cosmopolitan intellectuals. The philosophicalcreativity of the 1670s through the 1690s consisted to a considerable extentin working out different varieties of a nonsectarian religious stance: Spinoza’smonism was a religion of reason, while the Cambridge Platonists revived anolder religious universalism. In Holland, the experienced side-switcher PierreBayle, who had gone from the Jesuits to the Calvinists, was now calling fordisengagement from both sides; in the 1690s his Dictionary ridiculed theinconsistencies of dogmatic religion and favored a secularist skepticism. Philosophicalcreativity now appears as a dividing up of the territory of religiousliberalism. Again we see the pattern: as external political conditions shift thespace within which topics can be discussed, intellectuals respond to the opportunityby filling the space with a small number of contending positions.How then did Locke happen to find his distinctive piece of the turf, andwhy did his position prove so fruitful? Consider the trajectory of Locke’s career.He began his Essay on Understanding in 1671, in a circle of intellectualsaround Shaftesbury, as a way of clearing up debates over revealed religion. Hisnotion was that doctrinal speculation could be avoided by limiting the understandingto what can be derived from sensation and putting aside furtherattempts to “penetrate into the hidden causes of things” (Fraser, [1894] 1959:xvii, xxiv–xxvi). This position is not unlike that of scientists such as Boyle—anintimate friend of Locke—who chartered the Royal Society on the premise that598 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsscience should stay apart from religious disputes. The propagandist for theRoyal Society, Glanvill (who was at Oxford in the 1650s with Locke), was aliberal rationalist Anglican; under Henry More’s influence, he delivered in 1661a skeptical criticism of causality against the deceptiveness of the senses, defendingempiricism on moderate probabilistic grounds. Glanvill’s ingredients,as well as the upshot of his position, are similar to Locke’s. How did Lockearrive at a position which is far more famous, which turns the emphasis ontoa critique of innate ideas and principles? It was not a matter of defendingscience by a moderate empiricism, since this needed no defense. Locke insteadcrafted a position over the years which critiqued the foundations of all therival philosophies.What distinguishes Locke from Glanvill and others of that milieu are histravels and his resulting wide network contacts. Locke developed his philosophywhile in France during 1675–1679, where he encountered the Cartesiansand possibly Malebranche, and again during 1681–1689 when he was inHolland, in contact with the Portuguese Jewish Spinozaists and with Bayle.15The 1670s were the time when the Cartesian system was under intense debate.The loyalists Rohault and Régis were expanding the array of self-evidentaxioms to bolster the deduction of the cogito and its consequences, and Spinoza(1677) had taken the geometric method to a further extreme. On the otherside, Huet supported religious fideism, using skeptical arguments against thecogito, and Malebranche (1674) was shifting the emphasis to the perceptionof all ideas in God. Empirical scientists backed away from the extreme claimsof Cartesian rationalism. Its axiomatic method of obtaining certainty wasmodified by Leibniz into a criterion of plausible rather than absolute arguments(Brown, 1984).Locke joined the movement rejecting the Cartesian position, but he did thisin a distinctive way. He turned probabilism and empiricism into a weaponagainst all philosophies of substance—materialist, rationalist, and idealistalike. At a time when metaphysical positions were returning to the field, Lockestaked out an anti-metaphysical position which nevertheless held metaphysicalimplications. His empiricism moved ideas into the focus of attention, in oppositionto any substance that lay behind them. Locke opened a path beyond thedisputes between the Platonists and Hobbes, as well as between Cartesians andfideists or Malebranchian spiritualists. In Locke’s mature position, all that canbe known derives from simple ideas, received passively through the senses, andtheir recombination into complex ideas by the mind. This is all there is toabstractions and generalizations; there are no essences of things but onlynames, and these in turn are only ideas bundled together for convenience indiscourse. All the Cartesian traits of the world of extension are reduced toideas. There is no certainty from “clear and distinct ideas” in Descartes’s senseSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 599of the term, for these are not simple ideas at all. But there is no need to worryabout skepticism as applied to the external world; simple ideas are neither truenor false, since truth and falsity can apply only to propositions, not to ideas(Essay 1.52; see Locke, [1690] 1959).Locke rejects not only innate ideas but innate principles as well. Theseinclude the axioms which were proliferated by the Cartesians of the 1670s,and also the moral axioms laid down by the Cambridge Platonists. Cudworth,in arguing against the mechanistic philosophy, had pushed the position thatthe human mind depends upon God’s mind, which includes the eternal rationesof all things. In 1668 Henry More, against Hobbes’s moral conventionalism,argued for the existence of moral principles whose truth is immediate andevident (Copleston, 1950–1977: 5:62–63). Locke’s creativity was patterned byopposition not only to his Platonist acquaintances but also in the largerrestructuring of the intellectual field. At the same time that Locke was finishinghis Essay, Leibniz was formulating his doctrine of self-causative and non-communicatingsubstances, which implies that all our ideas are innate. The strongestmodern derivation of innate ideas and their strongest critique appeared atthe same time, and unknown to each other.16 Leibniz’s and Locke’s opposingpositions found their slots in the intellectual field and their external bases ofsupport. Leibniz’s position was supported in the Protestant universities ofGermany, where it represented religious liberalism in scholastic terminology.In England, Locke became the hero of the victorious Whigs; his rejection ofthe philosophy of essences with its theological overtones went along with hischampionship of secularization as the route to social peace.Deism and the Independence of Value TheoryThe framework of religious-political compromise after 1700 does not meanthat partisan conflict ceased. On the contrary, vicious struggles continued, bothin the factional and dynastic intrigues of parliamentary politics and on thereligious and intellectual front. English Catholics labored under legal disabilitiesand public suspicion, although like other Dissenters they were allowedprivate worship. Anglican dogma was enforced in the universities, but thesefaded from the focus of intellectual life. The new balance of power provedstable, and toleration and moderation were imposed by the circumstance thatno one was strong enough to overturn them. Religious toleration now shiftedthe central issues of intellectual conflict. The generation following Locke wasthe heyday of Deism; on the other side emerged the first explicitly reactionarydefense of religion.Deist tendencies had existed earlier, but they became the center of controversyin the wake of Locke. Many of the popular Deists are found close to600 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsLocke in the network.17 The most famous Deist work is the Christianity notMysterious (1696) of Toland, who was attacked from all sides. Nevertheless,Toland (107 in the key to Figure 10.1) had excellent connections; he wasrecommended to Locke by William Molyneux (in the Newton-Berkeley network);although Locke repudiated Toland after the controversy erupted, thelatter was patronized by Shaftesbury as well as by the government ministerLord Harley and received diplomatic appointments. Another Deist close toLocke’s circle of patrons was Blount (109), a nobleman who followed thematerialism of Hobbes; he too avoided persecution under the blasphemy lawsthrough his high connections. Anthony Collins (111), a rural justice of thepeace, carried on witty controversies against the religiously orthodox, includingJonathan Swift; Collins was an admirer and friend of Locke, and becamethe trustee of Locke’s estate.By the 1720s, Deism was close to winning its battle for respectability. Thelast gasp of religious coercion occurred in 1729–1731, when the Cambridgefellow Woolston was jailed for blasphemy for writing pamphlets on the allegoricalinterpretation of the scriptures. The Oxford ecclesiastical pensionerTindal in 1730 produced “the Deist’s bible,” Christianity as Old as the Creation,and declared that no state authority can compel conformity. By nowDeism was successful enough to split into Christian and non-Christian wings.The dissenting minister Morgan in 1737 defended a Christian Deism againstits rivals; Butler harmonized Religion Natural and Revealed in 1736, and wasrewarded with a series of bishoprics and the friendship of King George II.Again we see the significance of stalemate in religious politics and the influenceof career opportunism. Church livings were now the explicit spoils of partypolitics, and there were strong incentives to cross over religious lines. Now wefind religious side-switchers who become Deists, in effect rationalizing theircareers by advocating the religious common denominator. Tindal, who beganas an orthodox Anglican at Oxford in the 1670s, converted to Catholicism—atjust the time when Catholic restoration was the policy of the Stuart monarchy—and then recanted in 1688 when the Stuarts were overthrown. Butler,who came from a Presbyterian family, prospered by becoming an Anglicanpriest (EP, 1967: 8:139).This opportunism was not confined to the Deist side; the religious traditionalistSwift changed his loyalties from Whig to Tory in 1710 with the shiftin his prospects for patronage. Political opportunism was the condition ofintellectual life in this period; the emergence of the party system simultaneouslymarked the emergence of a new kind of structural competitiveness amongintellectuals. Literary creativity was underpinned by a publishing market whichdepended heavily on the subsidy of aristocratic subscribers. Writers were nolonger household dependents of their patrons, but to make a decent living theySecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 601needed the support of a political faction. Poets and dramatists such as Dryden,Pope, and Addison could make large fortunes, not so much from the sale oftheir works on the open market as in the form of sinecures and subscriptionsraised by their political supporters.18Political opportunism and mobility were central to the growth of universalism.Religious doctrines were no longer so cleanly lined up with politicalfactions. The Whigs, who carried out the Glorious Revolution, were the partyof religious moderation and toleration; and here we find the Deist sympathiesand connections of the Shaftesbury family and of Locke. Once in office, theWhigs soon fell into intrigues; their leader, Lord Harley, switched to becomehead of a Tory government. Tory conservatives, too, defenders of the oldaristocracy and tending toward the old Stuart dynasty, become caught up inthe wheeling and dealing of parliamentary and dynastic politics. The atmosphereof sophisticated manipulation carried over into intellectual matters. LordBolingbroke, who led Tory ministries in 1704–1708 and 1710–1714, frequenteda literary circle which included Pope, Gay, Congreve, and Swift.19Bolingbroke was a conservative; after the fall of his second ministry, he wasaccused of plotting to bring back the old Catholic dynasty, and fled to France.Pardoned, he returned in 1723; never regaining political office during the longyears of Whig ministries, he turned increasingly to literary activities. By thelate 1720s, he was filling Tory periodicals with Deist philosophy, emphasizingnatural religion and the superiority of the state of nature over civil society. Oneof his young friends, Lord Chesterfield, originally a Whig, broke with Walpolein 1730 and went over to the opposition, becoming the Tory secretary of statein the 1740s; hanging around with the Tory literary crowd, he made his lastingreputation with backstage advice on worldly success in his Letters to his(illegitimate) Son.Philosophically the most significant of the Deists was the third earl ofShaftesbury, grandson of Locke’s patron, personally educated under Locke’stutorship. Shaftesbury’s works appeared soon after Locke’s, in 1699 and in1708–1711, and built dialectically upon them. Locke’s dismissal of innate ideaswent too far, Shaftesbury held, in implying that there is no intrinsic humannature and intrinsic morality. To remedy this, he postulated an innate moralsense, analogous to the sense of harmony or proportion in music and art. Thelife of aesthetic appreciation and literary style is Shaftesbury’s ideal; he evenregards God as a good-natured being who can be understood only by thosewho have a sense of humor. Religion is taken almost lightheartedly as a subjectfor tolerant discussion; religion is secondary to morality, since the latter ispresupposed in concepts such as the wrath and justice of God. Shaftesburyoccupies a space similar to that held by Lord Herbert of Cherbury, whoseepistemology Locke had criticized while supporting Cherbury’s Deism.602 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsShaftesbury’s position opened up a terrain which was to comprise much ofphilosophy throughout the century in Protestant societies, Britain and Germany,where gradual secularization was taking place. Value theory became thetopic of conflicts and developments. Aesthetics, which had rarely been centralto philosophical interests before, now came into its own (Eagleton, 1990).Aesthetics became metaphysics by other means, in the anti-metaphysical atmosphereof the Lockean movement. The Deist position was now so dominantin the British intellectual world that attention shifted to controversies withinit. The Cherbury-Shaftesbury line of innate propensities became more andmore explicitly contrasted with the Lockean line of construction out of experience.In 1749 Hartley developed Locke’s empiricism into an explicit associationismin which ideas—including aesthetic ones—are selected for their intellectualpleasures and pains. Adam Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759)converted Shaftesbury’s innate moral faculty into an associationist psychologyof pleasures and pains through the device of imagining oneself in the place ofother persons. In Shaftesbury’s generation the innate faculties of morality andbeauty had been a halfway house for the naturalistic basis of religion. By themiddle generation of the 1700s, both religion and its bases were being derivedfrom experience, paving the way for the radical Utilitarianism of Bentham atthe end of the century.The Reversal of AlliancesIn England, Deist universalism was a doctrine for transcending religious strife.In France, when Deism emerged, it was part of a militant anti-religious movement;and this in turn led to a new opposition, the first explicitly reactionaryanti-modernism. Why did the exhausting stalemate of religious warfare, andthe political side-switching which engineered the settlement, result in tolerationand Deism in England but militant atheism in France? Here we must look tothe outermost layer of social causality, the political lineups which structuredthe networks of intellectual life.In places where the centralizing monarchy became more powerful, theindependent aristocracy went into intellectual and religious as well as politicalopposition. Wuthnow’s (1989) theory of the Enlightenment concerns essentiallythis anti-religious front. His comparisons across European societies showthat Enlightenment intellectuals appeared where there was a combination ofconditions. First, expansion of state bureaucracy produced a patronage baseamong civil servants, lawyers, and salons vying for prestige in the governmentcenters, who in turn became both a recruitment base for intellectualsand a literate audience reading and publicizing their work. Second, dividedauthority among independent judiciaries and representative parliaments fos-Secularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 603tered competition among political factions over the spoils available at thecenter. Wuthnow’s model is a version of the structural pattern of creativenetworks summarized at the end of Chapter 9: the intersection of multiplebases for intellectuals at a central focus of attention. My analysis of the FrenchEnlightenment differs from Wuthnow’s on one point: not only was therecreativity among intellectuals dependent on the patronage network of civilservants (Voltaire, the Encyclopedists), but also creativity broke out among thefeudal lords who opposed the centralizing state (Boulainvilliers, Montesquieu).In England after the Glorious Revolution, the government Establishment wasthe aristocracy; its principled moderation on the religious question was a keyelement of its control through an institutionalized balance of power. In France,the bases of political power remained deeply divided between the officialdomof the absolutist state and the aristocracy, now politically marginalized but stillsocially privileged. These bases for political factions gave rise to a new divisionin intellectual space.The French Deists, unlike the English, were not merely arguing for a reasonabletoleration and an end to religious strife, but were becoming outright opponentsof the church. The comte de Boulainvilliers extolled feudalism against thecentralizing monarchy. His Three Imposters (1719) holds that revealed religionis created by the false legislators, Moses, Christ, and Muhammad; the truereligion he builds on the philosophies of Descartes and Spinoza. Boulainvilliers’sfreethinking circle included disciples of Fontenelle and Bayle, and copiedclandestine manuscripts that eventually became the ammunition of the Voltairecircle.20The same combination of feudalism and natural religion made its biggestsplash with Montesquieu. He came from the provincial noblesse de robe,graduated from the Oratorian College in 1705, and was initiated into intellectuallife by Boulainvilliers’s circle. His first literary success came with hiscosmopolitan juxtaposition of different manners and religions in his PersianLetters (1721), not least because of its titillating scenes of sexual life in aMuslim harem. Visiting England during 1729–31, he befriended the Toryintellectuals around Bolingbroke, especially the young Chesterfield; when hereturned to France, he spent the next 17 years writing his Esprit des lois(Collins, 1908). In it aristocracy is raised to a general doctrine of the separationof powers and the defense of liberties against the crushing, oriental-style centralstate, harems and all. Montesquieu’s work, published anonymously in Genevain 1748, was attacked by the Jesuits and placed on the Index; the attention ofcontroversy reinforced its success.Rival positions sprang up to fill the anti-religious side of the field. Voltaire,604 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswho shared Montesquieu’s Deism, nevertheless attacked his Esprit des lois asa reactionary defense of aristocratic privilege. Voltaire pinned his hopes on theenlightened absolute ruler. Voltaire and Montesquieu had different bases ofmaterial support; Montesquieu had hereditary property, while Voltaire dependedon intermittent patronage of the French court, aristocratic salons, and,during the 1750s, a post as philosopher-poet in Berlin to Frederick the Great.These external bases underwrote the difference between Montesquieu andVoltaire; their commonalities came from their belonging to the same intellectualnetworks, including the one which crystallized into the Encyclopedia.Earlier both had been formed in the same London milieu; Voltaire in his firstexile in 1726–1729 had also frequented the Tory literary circle around Bolingbrokeand Pope. Prior to this network contact Voltaire had been a ratherconventional epic poet and playwright, but he found his niche when hereturned to France and published his Lettres philosophiques sur l’Anglais(1734). It contains the essentials which Voltaire was to embellish throughouthis life, in the form of oriental tales (emulating Montesquieu’s early specialty),allegories, satires, and histories. Voltaire presents Newton and the Englishas having found an enlightened, tolerant world based on reason and moderation.Voltaire claimed to occupy the middle ground between the intellectualfactions of his day; his Deism combatted not only the cruelties and superstitionsof dogmatic religion but also the materialism of the atheists. Scientific discoverieshe now took as the central argument for a reasonable religion: God isproven only by the argument from design, the watch proving the existence ofthe watchmaker, scientific laws proving the existence of the Lawgiver. Theemphasis is on the laws, not on a material substance or on a mind-substance;Voltaire uses Newton to reject materialism as well as metaphysics. Voltairerepresented the emerging attitude of militant scientism: science alone is enough;no other philosophy of any type is desirable. Cartesianism, once the pretenderto constitute rational science, was now swept away as a mere philosophy.Voltaire rejected the Deisms of both the Spinozaist and the Platonic lineagesin favor of an anti-metaphysical Deism.This turn away from metaphysics was characteristic of the French andEnglish intellectual worlds of the time in contrast to the German networks;there was no French equivalent of Wolff, Baumgarten, or Kant. The Frenchuniversities, with their connection to traditional training of clergy, were of nosignificance even as centers of creative reaction; since 1600 their enrollmentshad collapsed, and they lost control over the degrees monopolizing practice inthe professions.21 The weak position of the universities and the more comfortablebase of secular intellectuals among the salons and the government officialdomallowed Voltaire to be a militant Deist. He defended the true religion ofSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 605humanity, while he attacked the church as the defender of corrupt privilegesusing the weapons of mystifying ritual and dogma. Metaphysics is the soil onwhich transcendental superstitions grow. Voltaire’s philosophy was an ideologyfor secular intellectuals feeling their victory over the old church bases ofintellectual life. The philosophes lost the abstractness of traditional philosophicaltopics; their creative energy came from opening up secular topics. The olderrole of philosopher concerned with first principles was now differentiated intothe specialized sciences and disciplines.Coinciding with the Jesuits’ expulsion from France in 1764, Voltaire becamea crusader for the victims of religious persecution and published hisstrongest attacks on religion. Voltaire is a militant from a Deist stance, however,and his intellectual quarrels were increasingly against the group of philosophes,who were now turning toward materialism and atheism. The barond’Holbach, whose Paris salon hosted the Encyclopedists and their descendantsfrom 1749 to 1789, began to produce secret anti-Christian writings in the1760s; in 1770 his materialist Système de la nature set off the debate betweenatheism and Deism. Voltaire and his patron Frederick the Great upheld theside of Deism. Diderot, who had begun his career in 1745 by translatingShaftesbury’s deism into French, now supported d’Holbach and atheism. Themost extreme members of the group were those with the most personal security.Voltaire stayed within the range of his patrons’ religious tolerance; d’Holbachwas freer as a wealthy German expatriate in Paris; and the first really radicalnaturalism was expressed in 1758 by Helvetius, a retired sinecure holder whohad made a fortune in tax farming for the French crown.The central network of this period was the Encyclopedists (see Figure 11.1).They built on the new material base provided by a market for publications. Itwas the same structure which had appeared a generation earlier in England,supporting the Tory and Whig literary circles; and it would appear a generationlater in Germany, with the literary outburst at Berlin, Göttingen, and Weimar.Diderot and d’Alembert derived their chief income and occupation from theEncyclopedia from 1746 to 1772, and most of the famous intellectual careersof this period were begun by contact with this enterprise. The Encyclopedistsflourished as a group. D’Alembert was the only significantly creative one, withhis mathematical Traité dynamique in 1743, before the group formed in 1745.Its wealthy supporter d’Holbach (26 years old when he joined the Paris groupin 1749) gradually moved from scientific articles to his own materialist philosophyin the 1760s. Condillac, a young theology student at the Sorbonne inthe 1740s who happened to be d’Alembert’s cousin, was pulled in and producedhis metaphysical Traité des sensations in 1754.22 The young Turgot,studying at the Sorbonne in 1749–1751, was introduced to the group andimmediately produced his Tableau philosophique des progrès successifs de606 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFIGURE 11.1. FRENCH AND BRITISH NETWORK DURING THEENLIGHTENMENT, 1735–1800Secularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 607l’esprit humain (1750), with its historical evolutionism. Another wealthy patron,Helvetius, began to host the group in 1751, and came out with the radicalanti-religious naturalism of De l’Esprit in 1758. The group was a center ofcreative energy that suffused those who came in contact with it.Rousseau became the most famous of the Encyclopedia network by breakingwith it—which is to say, by finding a new axis of opposition. His wide-rangingcreativity corresponded to the range of his material bases of support. He soughttraditional sources of personal patronage in the homes of the nobility, as wellas literary reputation in the salons, the newly established prize competitionsof the academies, while also joining in the new publishing ventures. The youngRousseau reminds one of Leibniz; an ambitious young man from the provinces(in fact a former servant and music master who had risen by love affairs withhis mistresses), he showed up in Paris proposing a new musical notation. Thisline of innovation met no response, but he cast about in all directions untilsomething did. In 1745 (now at the age of 33) he met the Encyclopedia group;in 1750 he won a prize by his critique of human progress, in 1755 anotherwith his discourse on the origins of inequality and had an opera performedbefore Louis XV. Rousseau now quarreled with the reigning star, in 1758, andthe rivalry energized a peak creative burst. On the heels of Voltaire’s philosophicalnovels, including his masterpiece, Candide (1759), Rousseau toppedeverything in 1761–62 with his three most famous works, the Social Contractand his own ventures in the genre of the novel, La Nouvelle Héloise and Émile.Rousseau managed to be a political radical at a time when the institutionsof the old regime were fading, but he did it with a slant that made himdistinctive from his comrades. His earliest fame came from his Discours surles sciences et les arts, which declared that human inventions do not contributeto human happiness—this at a time when the Encyclopedia was booming withits promise to take an overview of all the arts and inventions that had contributedto progress. Rousseau extended the Deist themes of a natural religiontranscending the arbitrary conventions of human histories; but he took it intoa distinctively anti-modern space, extolling the state of nature against thechains of civilization. At the same time, the implied political radicalism in hiscritique made him famous with the coming generation of revolutionaries. Inbreaking with science, Rousseau also broke with Deism and with scientificatheism of the kind propagated by Helvetius and d’Holbach. In the mid-1760s,just as Voltaire and Diderot were becoming more openly critical of religion,Rousseau took the opposite side of the field, putting forward a sentimentalbasis for religion.The Encyclopedists, more radically than their predecessor Voltaire, hadformulated the modern alliance of science with the politics of progress andjustice, together with a critique of dogmatic religion. They crystallized what608 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswas to become the liberal, progressive, leftward beliefs of modernity. Rousseaustepped in at virtually the founding moment of this intellectual synthesis,selected the negative strands, and wove them into a position that was equallyviable under modern intellectual conditions. Rousseau was not a reactionary,and he used none of the older resources of the established church, the universitymetaphysics, or the legal privileges of the aristocracy. He was instead theanti-modernist modernist, and the turf he discovered proved to be fruitful fora major faction of modern times—indeed, down to its postmodernist incarnation.Once again we see that as the underlying conditions of intellectualproductivity change, creativity bursts out simultaneously on rival fronts.Anti-modernist Modernism and the Anti-scientific OppositionWe are now in the midst of the great reversal of intellectual alliances betweenreligious positions and science. Most creative intellectuals from Kepler throughLeibniz and Newton argued for the compatibility of science and religion.Religious intellectuals such as Gassendi and Mersenne appropriated science fortheir own theological purposes; on the other side, most scientists liked toclaim religious legitimation for their activities. The English scientists aroundBoyle were particularly concerned to show the religious orthodoxy of theirscience, and Boyle funded public lectures for the confutation of atheism bymeans of the evidence of science. With Locke, however, science went over tothe side of secularization; henceforward, scientists and their philosophicaladvocates would become increasingly associated with a minimalist religionsuch as Deism, and eventually with outright atheism. At the same time, religionbegan to turn against science; this trend emerged in the British milieu duringLocke’s lifetime, with Berkeley and Swift. In short, we are now arriving at the“modern” lineup in which a “liberal” in religious matters tends to claim thesupport of science, while religious “conservatives” turn against science.23We have been tracing the growth of the philosophical “left”; for its polarizingcounterpart on the “right,” let us return to the English networks of thelate 1600s and trace the connections which flowed from the Cambridge Platonists.Their first important offspring was Newton. Newton in turn had anetwork of scientific followers whose own network descendants were philosophers:Berkeley, Hume, and Swedenborg. It seems surprising that the arch-representativeof the successful scientific revolution should have a train of followerswhich led up to turning away from science, or even to an attack upon it.What we are seeing is a division within the camp of science itself. With theisolated exception of Hobbes, the older mechanical philosophy, in both itsBritish and French branches, had been in solidarity with religion. Now thereligious politics of science were changing. Locke’s followers used scientificSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 609philosophy as grounds for Deism; on the other side, a religious oppositionemerged which increasingly repudiated science. Since intellectual fame is madeby engaging in current controversies with current weapons, the most successfulof the new spiritualists came from the most active scientific networks andturned the tools of the scientific philosophy against itself.Newton was a key link in this process. Eventually the most famous of allscientists, he nevertheless was something of an outsider. The Invisible Collegehad formed at Oxford in the 1650s, then moved to London; but Newton wasat Cambridge, where the leading intellectual circle was the Platonists, criticsof the mechanical philosophy. Newton got his intellectual start from contactwith the Platonist side. He was born near Grantham, Henry More’s home; hewas first taught mathematics by a pupil of More, and More was his countryneighbor as well as his university colleague. Newton’s philosophical positionwas close to More’s metaphysics.24 When Newton published his first paper in1672, its theory of light was criticized by Hooke and Huygens as inferior totheir own theories. Newton largely withdrew from scientific work and spentmuch of the next decades on anti-Trinitarian theology and research on biblicalprophecies, and in searching for a primordial philosophy which he believedwas held in common by the ancient Pythagoreans and Chaldeans and expressedin a secret language used by the alchemists. Until 1684, when the astronomerHalley encouraged Newton to develop and publish his mathematical science,Newton was active largely as a philosopher in the occultist tradition mixedwith the theology of the Cambridge Platonists. His conflict with the mainstreamof materialist scientists continued the oppositions that we saw earlierin Figure 10.1 between Fludd and Mersenne, or More and Cudworth againstGassendi and Hobbes. Even after the triumph of Newton’s astronomy (1687)and his optics (1704), there is an echo of Cudworth versus Descartes in thedebate between Newtonians against the French Cartesians over Newton’saction-at-a-distance in the framework of empty space, where the materialistsvisualized a world of continuous matter.Although Newton became the icon of the scientific modernists, he originatedoutside the core of the mechanical philosophers, and his own networkof followers soon exploited the anti-modernist and even anti-science side ofthe field. Among Newton’s followers was William Molyneux (105 in the keyto Figure 10.1), who founded the Dublin Philosophical Society in 1683 as anaffiliate of the Royal Society. Molyneux worked in astronomy and optics,concerned especially with the principles of telescopes, and corresponded in the1690s with Locke, raising issues in the sensory theory of ideas by consideringa hypothetical blind man who later acquired sight. His son Samuel Molyneux(120) continued this work on optics at Trinity College, Dublin; he wasBerkeley’s friend during the period (1705–1709) when Berkeley was writing610 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathshis mathematical notebooks and his New Theory of Vision (1709), the verytopic on which Newton had published his most popular book, Opticks, in1704.25With Berkeley, the scientific philosophy turned into an attack on science.Empiricism was pushed to an extreme and used as a weapon against materialism.Berkeley criticized the current doctrines of optical science, extendingLocke’s empiricism and frequently using Molyneux’s hypothetical blind man.The mathematical explanations of how distance and magnitude are perceiveddepend on calculating angles of light rays at the eye. Berkeley appeals toexperience that we have no such consciousness of rays and calculations. Geometryitself is unreal when it goes beyond experience to points withoutdimension and lights without breadth. And since there is always a minimumvisible object, microscopes are not really an improvement on normal sight;they show us a different world, one that no longer has any connection withthe objects we know by touch. Every different sense gives its own experiencesand ideas. Our conception that there is an object uniting all the senses is onlya prejudice, resulting from language which applies a common word to experienceswhich have usually gone together. Berkeley’s extreme phenomenalismtakes the world of experience apart into separate streams; he accepts Locke’smethod but demands it remain consistent and admit no further entities.That Berkeley was counterattacking science in the name of religion isapparent from the publications which followed hard on the New Theory ofVision. His Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) declares in its subtitle thatit examines “the grounds of skepticism, atheism and irreligion,” and he announcesthe same thing in the title of his Three Dialogues between Hylas andPhilonous, in Opposition to Sceptics and Atheists (1713). Berkeley was aclergyman, holding a succession of clerical posts and ending as a bishop. Thegreat plan of his life was to found a missionary college in Bermuda from whichto evangelize the Americas for the Anglican Church. He attacked Locke andhis followers as leading to Deism, now polemically equated with atheism.Berkeley took apart the scientific doctrine of primary and secondary qualities,a guidepost of materialist research since Galileo. For him the primary qualitiesof pure extension do not exist; experience shows us sensations which alwayshave color and other “secondary” qualities. There is no material world ofprimary qualities behind those we experience; this conception arises only froman error based on false use of words—Locke’s critique of false names, butpushed far beyond Locke’s purposes. Berkeley then turns his pure phenomenalisminto an argument for God: if experience shows consistency, it is becauseGod is always there presenting human minds with coherent experiences.This anti-scientific turn within the intellectual network which had hithertobeen dominated by scientists was not an isolated incident. Berkeley’s principalSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 611supporter at the time he formulated his critique was Swift, then in Dublin aschaplain to the Lord Justice of Ireland; Swift introduced Berkeley to the Dublincourt, and soon after into the Whig literary circle at London. Swift was busyjust then fighting Deists, publishing his satirical Argument against AbolishingChristianity in 1711, and carrying on controversy with Collins in 1713 (Luce,1968). Swift too followed a clerical career; like Berkeley, he had studied atKilkenny College (“the Irish Eton”) and at Trinity, Dublin, sought governmentpreferment, and acquired a church living in Ireland. Swift’s early networkconnections, however, were not with the scientists but with a literary circle.Swift was Dryden’s cousin, and in the 1690s happened to be chaplain to thediplomat Sir William Temple, who had imported into England the quarrel ofthe ancients versus the moderns. This had originated as a literary dispute overthe merits of classical versus modern poetry and drama; when Fontenelle hadrevived the debate in France in 1688, he had marshaled science on the side ofthe moderns. Swift’s first publication (1704) joined the side of his employer,attacking modern scientists and philosophers in Battle of the Books. It was aslot Swift never left. The same vehement satire is found in 1726 in Gulliver’sTravels. One section recapitulates the battle of ancients and moderns: (Voyageto Laputa, Chapter 9); Gassendi’s and Descartes’s systems are described asexploded, and Newton’s as a fashion which will go the same way. Bacon’shouse of learning is satirized as a collection of impractical fools engaged inodoriferous experiments such as returning human excrement into its originalfood. One scientist is a blind man who attempts to mix colors by feel andsmell, a joke straight out of Berkeley and Molyneux.Less scatological than Swift, Berkeley shows a similar concern to cut downscience. Numbers are never found in experience but are only an imputationadded by the mind (Berkeley, [1709] 1925: 119); the immediate objects of sightare fleeting and mutable, and “to compute their magnitudes,” even if possible,“must yet be a very trifling and insignificant labour” (Berkeley, [1709]1925: 84). Berkeley criticizes Newton’s fluxions and the differential calculus;infinitesimals cannot exist, since they are not matters of experience (RoblesGarcia, 1991).Berkeley’s idealist move was there to be made in the existing structure ofthe intellectual field. We can see this through several other British clergymennearby in the network, who followed a similar path but whose fame waspreempted by Berkeley. John Norris (106) was a former Oxford fellow andvillage rector, a correspondent of Henry More and of Locke, and a religiouspoet of the “metaphysical” style. Norris quarreled with Locke, who consideredthe former reactionary, and criticized the Deist Toland. In 1701 Norris producedhis own philosophy, a version of Malebranche’s occasionalism—God isalways present, upholding the causality of the world. Norris’s neighbor, Arthur612 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsCollier (119), another Oxford graduate and rural clergyman, published hisClavis Universalis in 1713, almost coinciding with Berkeley (and apparentlywithout knowledge of him). Collier declared that perception gives no directevidence that the external world exists; indeed, the concept of an externalworld is self-contradictory, as is the notion of infinite divisibility.A more popular version of the attack on materialism also sprang fromthe English scientific network. Swedenborg, the son of a Swedish bishop,visited England during these same years (1710–1713) and met with the Newtonianastronomers (103–104). Returning to Sweden, he became a miningassessor and worked in geological and other sciences. Later (during 1734–1756) Swedenborg transmuted science into theosophy, creating a metaphysicsout of metallurgy and a cosmology of three heavens and three hells withcorrespondences among the levels. The realm of creation, he said, is dead; lifeis only apparent, the investing of matter by an omnipresent God who alone isalive. Swedenborg combined the same strands of cultural capital as Berkeley—Lockean empiricism together with the superiority of Christianity—and bothcame out with a new idealism. Swedenborg became a constructive dogmatist,aiming at a popular following and producing a theology for a new sect.Berkeley explicitly addressed himself to the cognoscenti, whose intellectualerrors he wished to combat (see Preface to Principles of Human Knowledge).Compared to his rivals in this intellectual niche, Berkeley was much more inthe center of intellectual networks, and he stuck to an austere argument usingthe dominant philosophical techniques to undermine themselves. Norris andCollier were upstaged; Malebranche’s influence, largely limited to France, diedwith his generation; Swedenborg left the realm of tightly argued philosophicalabstraction for a popular reception. Berkeley became famous in the long-termphilosophical community by exemplifying the distinctiveness of its turf. Thestruggle over science moved epistemology into the central region of philosophyin its own right. Berkeley’s idealist position anchored one extreme in the arrayof philosophical arguments and opened a heritage of problems to whichsuccessors keep returning.The Triumph of EpistemologyBerkeley and Hume formed two prongs of the movement by which the empiricistmovement inadvertently renewed abstract philosophy. Berkeley’s wingturned scientific analysis against itself, thereby exposing the terrain of morehighly reflexive epistemological and metaphysical argument. Hume crystallizedthe opposite wing, loyalists of the new secularism and empiricism, whichnevertheless found its own methodological issues returning to abstract philosophicalterrain. Hume had strongly secular ambitions, to use a thoroughgoingSecularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 613empiricism to build the human sciences, where he expected the rewards to beeven greater than in the natural sciences (Mossner, 1954; Passmore, 1980;Greig 1932). Book 1 of his Treatise of Human Nature (1739), containingHume’s philosophically fateful criticism of causality and of the identity of theself, is merely preliminary, laying the foundations of a science of humanunderstanding; the payoff comes in the later books, comprising a psychologyof human motivation, a science of morality (1739–40) followed by a scienceof aesthetic taste and of human societies. The last two never appeared as such,but Hume did go on to write his theory of economics (1752) and his Historyof Great Britain (1754–1762), which contained the essence of his politicaltheories and established his contemporary fame.Hume inadvertently occupies philosophical turf in formulating a programmaticstatement as the basis for the moral sciences. He begins with the principleof empiricism—"all of our ideas are copied from our impressions"—(Treatise76) and argues deductively for its consequences. Hume purifies the empiricisttendency of his predecessors, allowing no other source of logic or of ideas thanour experience of sensory impressions. He critiques all previous metaphysicalpositions. He allows neither material substances behind the phenomenal fluxnor any immaterial substance; Cartesian dualism, Spinoza’s monism, Malebranche’soccasionalism, Newtonian space, abstract ideas, and primary qualitiesdistinct from secondary qualities all go down under the critique. So do thecertainty of mathematics, the necessity of causes, the identity of the self, andimplicitly the nature of the soul and any argument for the existence of theDeity. Hume’s main positive doctrine, the principle of the association of impressionsby which the human mind builds up its habitual ideas, is itself aphilosophical argument rather than a result of empirical investigations. Hisprogram makes his moral science superior to the natural sciences; indeed itbecomes their basis, for it is the psychological law of association which is “thecement of the universe” (Abstract 32; see Passmore, 1980: 105) rather thanan externally existing causality or a freestanding mathematics.Why should it be someone like Hume who took this step? Hume was partof an intellectual movement, the Scottish Enlightenment, which ran throughAdam Smith to Ferguson, Millar, and Stewart. The other Scots shared Hume’sprogram for building the human sciences, and laid the basis for fields such aseconomics, sociology, and archaeology. For the most part they occupied specializedempirical turfs, and had neither Hume’s creativity in philosophicalissues nor his radical skepticism; nor were they generally as extreme as Humein making the natural sciences subservient to moral science. One significantdifference is that Hume came at the very beginning of this movement, writinghis Treatise during 1734–1737, and it was the earliest part of his writings thatformulated his philosophy and his metaphysical critique. Hume had the firstglimpse of a new intellectual field opening up, the autonomous moral sciences,614 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsand rushed in to ground it and justify it: activities which took place on theterritory of general philosophical argument.In the intellectual network in Figure 11.1, Hume is connected early in lifewith the Deists. His relative Henry Home (Lord Kames) had been working onprinciples of natural religion, and Hume hoped to get from him an introductionto Butler, who had just published his famous Religion Natural and Revealed(1736). In addition, Hume is in the network of Newton’s scientific followers,his teachers at Edinburgh; in this respect he is in a similar network positionwith Berkeley, which suggests why there are parallels between their positions.Creativity is not simply discipleship. Hume broke with his predecessors inimportant respects; his radical empiricism and skepticism destroyed Deism,and he critiqued Newtonian concepts and reduced natural science to an offshootof the laws of the mind which were for Hume the true equivalent toNewton’s laws of motion. The young Hume apparently knew that there wasa fundamental philosophical transformation at stake. He went for three yearsto study and write at La Flèche, site of Descartes’s old college, where hedeliberately informed himself about the Cartesians, Malebranche, Spinoza, andBayle—in short, all the prominent positions on the Continent. These too hecritiqued in his effort to clear the ground of all philosophical rivals to hisempiricism.26Consider now the dynamics of the intellectual world which underlay thevarious strands of Hume’s position. The intellectuals of the Scottish Enlightenmentwere religious moderates, who pushed increasingly in the direction ofnaturalism.27 The religious situation was propitious for this stance. Scottishpolitics had been a scene of strife between extreme factions: Catholic Loyalistsand royal legitimists in the Highlands, where feudal relationships remainedstrong, and Calvinists in the commercial Lowland cities, who had obtainedcontrol of the state church. It had been the Scottish dynasty, the Stuarts, whohad attempted to bring back Catholicism in England and precipitated theRevolution in 1688; and Scotland was the main center of Jacobite plots to putthem back on the throne—plots which boiled over into rebellion in 1708 and1715–16. There were riots in Edinburgh in 1736–37, leading up to the attemptedinvasion of England in 1745–46. Jacobitism attracted those who weredissatisfied with the conditions of the Union with England, which had beenestablished in 1707: opponents of English tax and customs policies and thosewho were excluded from patronage for church and government positionsdispensed from London. In this situation the Episcopalian Church—the officialChurch of England—was one of the dissatisfied outsiders; under the politicalcompromise which formed the Union, the church was merely tolerated underthe official establishment of the Presbyterians. Thus Scottish Episcopalians toowere suspect as Jacobite sympathizers and activists.The faction to which Hume, Kames, Adam Smith, and the other intellec-Secularization and Philosophical Meta-territoriality • 615tuals of the Scottish Enlightenment belonged stood against the fanaticism ofall these religious parties. These were the Scots who were closest to Englishpolitical power. They were administrators of Scottish government under theUnion: Hume’s grandfather was Lord Chief Justice; Kames succeeded to thehigh court; Adam Smith had strong connections in London; Hume intermittentlyheld English military and diplomatic posts in the 1740s and again in the1760s and ended as undersecretary of state. The ruling political faction inScotland had structural reasons to take a secular outlook, since every churchfaction, including the Episcopalians, was their opponent. The situation resemblesthat of Hobbes, promoting a militant materialism in Royalist circles duringa religious-led rebellion; but it was more successful, since Hobbes becamedisreputable when the Episcopalian Church was reestablished after the Restoration,whereas in Scotland the government was essentially secular and benton keeping control over religious factions, all of which were potentially subversive.Once again illustrating the pathway from religious stalemate to an ideologyof moderation, the Scottish intellectuals in these ruling circles became Deists,tending to go even further toward secularism. The opening up of the socialsciences followed from the concomitant rearrangement of the means of intellectualproduction. Issues of value theory had been traditionally containedwithin church doctrine; analysis of the social world was usually circumscribedby the religious legitimation of political authority, or left without sustainingnetworks because such analysis did not come into the province of church-controlleduniversity education. In Scotland the universities were bones of contentionin politico-religious strife. As the secularizing government gained the upperhand, by the 1740s the crown was making the majority of the faculty appointments,at least at the Lowland universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow. Thecenter of gravity was wrested from traditional theological subjects and shiftedtoward law, history, and natural philosophy. Innovators such as Smith andFerguson turned chairs of moral philosophy into bases for economics, politicaltheory, and sociology. By the 1740s, Scottish graduates were shifting from theclergy to careers in the civil service (Wuthnow, 1989: 254–260). At a timewhen the universities in England and France, still under clerical control, weremoribund, the Scottish universities were flourishing with these new careerpaths and the intellectual opportunities that opened up for the teachers of thesenew subjects. The number of Edinburgh and Glasgow students almost tripledbetween 1700 and 1770; Edinburgh alone in the latter year, with 1,100students, was three times the size of Oxford and Cambridge combined duringthis same period (Wuthnow, 1989: 252; Stone, 1974b: 91–92).Hume was the first to see the intellectual space that was opening up.28 Hisdetachment from religion fit the trend of university politics, but it was only616 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsone ingredient in Hume’s stance. He pushed into the new territory as aggressivelyas he could, aiming to reap fame for constructing the new moral sciences.Hume’s skepticism was a by-product of his empiricist principle, a piece ofcultural capital which he could now exploit without concessions to religiouslybased concepts; the demolition of causality and of the self were inadvertentconsequences, which seem to have dismayed Hume himself. What was morevaluable for him was his empiricist logic, his rules for induction, his principlesof habit and custom which govern the human mind; and in his later writings,once the social sciences had taken off, he downplayed the critical extremes ofhis early writings. Hume’s skepticism was not in any of the previous traditions:not an ancient Pyrrhonism aiming at ataraxeia, the tranquillity of withholdingjudgment on everything; certainly not a fideist destruction of rationality; noragain Bayle’s tolerant skepticism striking a balance among competing fanaticisms.Hume was being an empiricist when he declared that no one eversincerely follows skepticism, and that reasoning is not so much “cognitive” as“sensitive.” (Hume, [1739–40] 1969: 179). Hume was not a skeptic but apsychological imperialist.With Hume’s empiricism one might expect the age of philosophical creativityto come to an end. His contemporaries, the Encyclopedists, banished notjust metaphysics but the asking of any questions regarded as futile and insoluble.In place of these traditional activities of philosophers were now disciplineswith limited empirical focus: the natural sciences, history, politics, economics,psychology. Nevertheless, the pure problem space which constitutes philosophyhad been expanded, and Hume’s new puzzle attracted several further stances.In the provincial Scottish universities, especially centers of Presbyterian traditionalismsuch as Aberdeen, Reid, Beattie and Campbell responded with aphilosophy of common sense which confirmed both ordinary experience andthe traditional objects of religion. Working with a richer mixture of ingredientsfrom the German networks, Kant took up Hume’s challenge as if the naturalsciences had been undermined and needed to be propped up against theskeptical destruction of causality. Not only epistemology but metaphysics toowas renewed.Five generations before, the emergence of the rapid-discovery sciences hadtransformed intellectual space. Descartes and his contemporaries, attemptingto replace philosophy with the new science, nevertheless made their programmaticarguments on philosophical terrain. The secularizers, hoping to endreligious strife, banished metaphysics as a residue of theology but wove anothermesh of abstract questions. The pattern repeats; again an effort to kill philosophycreates a higher ground upon which philosophy expands.