CHAPTER 12£Intellectuals Take Control of Their Base:The German University RevolutionThe period from 1765 to the present is institutionally all of a piece. Thecontinuity may not be apparent at first glance; Kant and the German Idealistsseem epochs away from the themes of our own century. But Idealism was theintellectual counterpart of the academic revolution, the creation of the modernuniversity centered on the graduate faculty of research professors, and thatmaterial base has expanded to dominate intellectual life ever since. Kantstraddled two worlds: the patronage networks of the previous period, and themodern research university, which came into being, in part through Kant’s ownagitation, with the generation of Kant’s successors. The time of the Romanticsand Idealists was a transition to our contemporary situation. University-basedintellectual networks had existed before, but never with such autonomy forresearchers to define their own paths and such power to take over every sphereof intellectual life. The philosophical issues of the last 200 years have beenthose generated by the expansionary dynamic of that system.There have been two large consequences of the academic revolution, oneinternal to philosophy, the other structural.The contents of modern philosophy have been built up in a sequence ofstruggles. The battle first fought in Germany recurred as the old religiousschools were reformed in one country after another along the lines founded atthe University of Berlin in 1810. Variants of Idealism appeared several generationslater in Britain, the United States, Italy, Sweden, and elsewhere, when theGerman academic model was imported. Idealism was the battle doctrine of thefirst generations of secularizers, a halfway house for wresting theology intosecular hands; as the tide turned, Idealism became adopted as a defensivedoctrine by religious thinkers. In each case, the new generation went beyondthe halfway house of their predecessors into rebellious movements such asmaterialism, positivism, and analytical and semantic philosophies. There occurredthe usual splits to fill the new attention space under the intellectual law618of small numbers; prominent movements acquired rivals, some settling in thegaps with hybrid doctrines such as vitalism and neo-realism. Later generationsrebelled against their teachers, braiding the themes of their grandteachers intotheir work in revival movements such as Neo-Kantianism, neo-Marxism, andin our own day what amounts to neo-existentialism and neo-Idealism.Underneath this cascade of rivalries, the space once held by the religiousphilosophers has anchored the array of positions; this remains so even in thepresent day, when secularizers have so fully won the battle that the oldreligious-philosophical positions have become reoccupied by secular thinkers.Religion did not retreat before the secularizers without a fight, and the sophisticationgenerated by opponents of militant rationalism and materialism setthe problems and tools of thought which have continued to shape the fieldeven after the religious conservatives were driven from their chairs.Structurally, the academic revolution divided the old all-purpose intellectualrole of the philosopher into a multitude of academic specialties. The processof specialization, not yet ended today, has affected the contents of intellectuallife in several ways. Most obvious is the crystallization of the subject mattersof the new disciplines, ranging from psychology, sociology, and the other socialsciences, to the natural sciences, humanities, and literature, now incorporatedas academic subjects. Academic specialization affects philosophical topics, bothearly and late. At the moment when a field splits off to control its own academicappointments, its separate meetings and specialized publication outlets, thereis usually an ideology which expresses on general grounds the rationale for thesplit. The vehement materialism which broke out in Germany in the generationthat freed itself from the Naturphilosophie of the Idealists is an example ofsuch an ideology of disciplinary independence. Often such moves are accompaniedby a claim that philosophy has been outlived and superseded by itsoffspring.Nevertheless, the general-purpose intellectual role continues to exert anattraction, and finds new subject matters in the very topic of the disciplinarychallenge. One such reactive movement was Neo-Kantianism, playing off thehistoricist methodologies laid down by the academic historians; the emergenceof pragmatism in the midst of the movement which formed experimentalpsychology was another; yet others were the development of both phenomenologyand logical positivism out of reflection on the battle over the foundationsof mathematics. In each such case the existence of rival disciplinary homeshas meant that individuals could migrate back and forth between bases (thecareer of William James is an elaborate example), borrowing and combiningthemes from each. Far from emptying out the contents of philosophy, the riseof the disciplines created a new mode of generating intellectual innovations onIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 619the most general (i.e., philosophical) turf itself. This is one reason why, despiteso many pronouncements to the contrary, modern philosophy has not fadedaway but prospered.I will not carry the detailed analysis of the intellectual world down to ourown times; I take it only to three generations ago, the philosophers of approximately1900–1935. As throughout, my guiding thread through the labyrinthof philosophical positions is the inner network of personal relations, rivalries,and master-student chains among the most influential philosophers. New problemsemerge for this network analysis as we come closer to the present.Previously, the methodological problem was too little information about thelives and personal contacts of the philosophers. From the 1700s onwarddocumentation becomes ever more abundant, and this creates an opposite kindof procedural problem. The networks on which my analysis is based consistin ties not among just any persons at all, but among those who are influentialenough to be remembered by generations in the future. The difference betweena minor and a major figure is indexed by just that feature. We have seen thatminor philosophers (for instance, in T’ang China or Hellenistic Greece) areoften famous in their own day, but later fade away into the recollection of aname and a brief label for their doctrine.As we near the present, we lose the ability to discern who will have thiskind of lasting influence. There is little doubt that Kant is of long-termimportance. But can we say the same of Bergson, or Russell, or Sartre? IsNietzsche or Whitehead a figure of enduring significance? There are empiricalreasons why I expect many of the great names in our own memories to fadeout for subsequent centuries. In Chapter 2 we found that over the 36 generationsof Greece and the 63 generations of China, there was an average of 0.4to 0.8 major and 1.0 to 1.9 secondary philosophers per generation. Even inpeak periods of creativity, the maximal numbers are about 2 major philosophersand 3 to 5 secondary philosophers per generation. Similar levels arefound in Europe in the medieval period and up through the 1700s and eventhe mid-1800s. For the early 1900s, though, using the same criterion of spacedevoted to them in standard histories, I find some 8 candidates for the rankof major philosopher.1We lack even this much perspective on the period 1935–1965, the generationjust before our own. Consider the judgments of the historians writingaround 1890–1910, including philosophers active in their own right such asWindelband or Royce, on the thinkers of their own midcentury background.The towering figure for many of them (e.g., for Merz, 1904–1912) is Lotze,who by current criteria seems secondary at best. Royce writes of “The Spiritof Modern Philosophy” (1892) as if Idealism still rules the roost, of course a620 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathspartisan judgment by an active participant. Others who greatly impressed theircontemporaries were James Martineau (Merz, [1904–1912] 1965: 4:376),Clifford, and Sir William Hamilton, as well as iconoclasts such as D. F. Strauss,Büchner, and Buckle. Of course, given the seesaw rivalry between adjacentgenerations, it is not surprising that thinkers who are very influential in thelong run go through a reputational trough a generation or two after their death.Hegel’s reputation was at its nadir in the 1850s, before the wave of neo-Hegelian revivals. Even Kant, whose fame was never seriously eclipsed onceestablished in the late 1780s, was regarded as outmoded by his immediatesuccessors.2 Aristotle’s reputation, like Mencius’, declined markedly in a fewgenerations and rose to towering heights only in the very long run. Scientistsare not immune; Darwin was rather on the outs of his profession around 1910and only recovered his preeminence in the 1930s (Degler, 1991).This is not to say that everyone whose reputation dips after his or her deathwill be revived still later; the law of small numbers makes it certain that mostof the big names of the early twentieth century will fade into minor ones inthe twenty-first century and thereafter. It is important to discipline ourselvesnot to make this a game of “which heroic individual will survive.” The themeof my sociological argument is that creativity is not a one-shot event, but aprocess stretching around the persons in whom it manifests itself, backwards,sideways, and forwards from the individuals whose names are the totemicemblems thrown up by their networks. It is intergenerational networks dividingup attention space that make intellectual history in every sense. The creativityof the thinkers of our own century is literally not fully created yet.It would be safer to bring my analysis to a close around 1865. But Icontinue it nevertheless two generations forward, even as the haze of livingpartisanship closes in. The period of the 1930s (with a slightly later continuationof the same cast of characters) is just now coming into a calmer sight.The Vienna Circle and the existentialists, shrouded in polemic both in theirown day and in the decades immediately following, are becoming subjects ofhistorical study; the sediments are settling as the stream passes on. The sociologicalstructures of early 1900s intellectuals are familiar enough: philosopherscontinue to group into rival circles, to divide up the attention space under thelaw of small numbers; there is the same clustering of the eminent with oneanother that we saw in China and Greece; the intergenerational chains ofteachers and pupils run right down through Frege and Russell to Wittgenstein,and from the Vienna Circle to Quine (who also descends from Royce throughC. I. Lewis), or from Husserl to Heidegger to Marcuse. Whatever the futurehistorical significance of these last named, the chains at the center of theattention space are still there. And so my concluding chapter will run out inIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 621the mist of the near-present, even as the network now becoming visible in themiddle distance begins to take on familiar contours.The German Idealist MovementIn retrospect, everything is familiar. German Idealism does not surprise usbecause we know it happened. But from the perspective of 1765, what followedcould only be a huge surprise. The themes of the Enlightenment were the deathof philosophy and its replacement by empirical science, above all the death ofmetaphysical speculation and anything in it that smacked of supernaturalreligion. Yet the following generation was to make one of the most intenseoutpourings of philosophical creativity in world history, moreover taking theform of the strongest claims of Idealism ever seen. To be sure, Kant, whoopened the door to this outburst, was not totally unprecedented, insofar as hecontinued the pro-science and anti-theological themes of the Enlightenment;yet his radical means were soon taken up by a movement that, far fromdestroying speculative philosophy, drastically widened its claims.How can we account for this reversal in the self-perceived trend of thetimes? To label it a Romantic reaction is question-begging hindsight. TheIdealist revolution provides a particularly clear example of the three layers ofcausal grounding for the social production of ideas. We consider first, in ourusual way, the clustering of ideas and the social networks among those whoproduced them; second, the changing material bases of intellectual productionwhich undergirded the Idealist movement; and third, the surrounding political-economic context which generated these organizational changes. Frominward to outward, we will examine the outpouring of Idealist philosophiesby a dense network of creative thinkers, from Königsberg to Jena-Weimar toBerlin; surrounding these, the crisis and reform of the German universitysystem; and at the outmost layer, the French Revolution and the Napoleonicwars, which cracked the religious and political authority of the north Germanstates and unleashed the period of reform.One layer does not reduce to another; least of all do the contents of thephilosophies reduce to the outermost material and political conditions. Intellectualsmaneuver within their own attention space, reshaping the tools at handfrom past and current controversies internal to their own sphere, while energizedby the structural opportunities opening up in the material and politicalworld surrounding them. Like pegs through the stack of concentric rings, Kantand Fichte are intellectual revolutionaries as well as network stars; again, primemovers in the struggle to reform the universities to the advantage of thephilosophical faculty; still again, shapers of the German ideological responseto the French Revolution. Idea ingredients flow inward from each surrounding622 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathslayer, but the core which transmutes them into philosophy is the ongoingstruggle in intellectual space.The Network and Its ConflictsGerman Idealism began with Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason in 1781, and bythe end of the decade it had erupted into a far-flung movement lasting downinto the 1820s. To understand why it should have emerged in this way, wemust start further back, with the pre-Idealist network from which Kant appeared.Creative networks beget further creativity, and the intersection of suchnetworks drives up the level. Why should such a network have come intoexistence at Königsberg on the Baltic 300 miles east of Berlin? In part becauseKönigsberg was the traditional university in the original east Prussian territory(although conquest had acquired Halle, in central Germany); Königsberg enjoyeda special connection with the new capital, remaining the site wherePrussian kings were crowned. And again, why then should creative networksbe fostered by Berlin, as late as 1800 an unattractive garrison town on theeastern plains with sand blowing in the streets? (Safranski, 1989: 121). Becauseunder Frederick the Great, Prussia was the expanding geopolitical power ofnorthern Europe. In emulation of the cultural greatness of his French enemies,Frederick had imported academicians from Paris, along with dissident (andtherefore patronage-needy) stars such as Voltaire and La Mettrie. Combine thiswith Frederick’s anti-clericalism, part of the drive to build a strong state bysubordinating the church, and one can see a cultureless marchland conquerorquickly becoming a magnet for Enlightenment intellectuals. In sociologicaltheory, at the outermost causal layer, the geopolitical and economic rise or fallof states shifts the location of resources, expanding the material bases for someintellectual networks at the expense of others. Networks realign; new philosophicalpositions appear.Kant and his contemporaries grew up in a situation where opportunitiesfor careers as culture producers were expanding, if spartan and competitive.In connection with the Prussian innovation of a conscript standing army camethe first compulsory public elementary schooling, spurring further educationalexpansion at all levels. The growth of an educated and anti-clerical bureaucracyfostered a publishing industry; by the 1760s Berlin had its own intellectualcircle outside the Academy of Sciences centered on publishers and writers suchas C. F. Nicolai and Moses Mendelssohn (see Figure 12.1). What was happeningin Prussia was emulated by many of the Kleinstaaterei. The geopoliticalfragmentation of central and western Germany made competition in the newcultural marketplace of literary publication a substitute for military glory onthe part of the smaller states. The structure made possible not only Berlin andIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 623FIGURE 12.1. GERMAN NETWORK, 1735–1835:BERLIN–KÖNIGSBERG AND JENA–WEIMARKönigsberg but Weimar as well. If there were also centers of religious reaction,like Bavaria (and for short periods Prussia itself), and counter-movements ofPietist anti-Enlightenment throughout the north German population, the competitionof multiple centers conjoined to such conflicts provided energy andexcitement for intellectual issues rather than choking them off by the impositionof orthodoxy.In the 1760s and 1770s, German thinking was a branch of French themes;Enlightenment Deism forged ahead against religious traditionalism, and thefocus of attention swung toward a newer conflict, Enlightenment versus sentimentalism.The latter was again a pattern from the French attention center,first exploited by Rousseau. Since the intellectual world lives on oppositionsand by dividing up the dominant attention space, rationalists opened up a slotfor anti-rationalists, and the opponents lived symbiotically by the attentionthey drew to one another. If Rousseau was warmly received in Germany, thiscannot be explained tautologically by his “influence” or his “genius”; ratherhis sentimentalism fitted a situation that fostered just this opposition. Most ofthe north German states had gone much further in de-clericalizing than inFrance, reducing clergy to agents of secular government; this freed religiousimpulses in the populace for a private marketplace of emotional and moralsymbols. If one of the hallmarks of modernity is the privatization of religion,and concomitantly the secular control of the school system, northern Germanywas moving through the transition to cultural modernity earlier than virtuallyany other society. Not surprisingly, we find in Germany the first notableexpression of the anti-modern intellectual stance, the Sturm und Drang movementof the 1770s.How, then, did the network of Enlightenment academicians, Deists, andpopular sentimentalists build up to the point where it could give birth toGerman Idealism? In the 1750s Kant was a middle-aged product of KönigsbergUniversity, submitting scientific memoirs to the prize contests of the BerlinAcademy and corresponding with mathematicians such as Lambert. A far morefamous Königsberger was Hamann, known as “the wizard of the north” forhis 1760 book, Die Magie aus Morgenlande (The Magi of the East), explainingthe symbolic meanings of astronomical observations. There was a structuralrivalry here, for Kant had made his first small mark a little earlier with hisscientific theory of the heavens (1755); in 1766 Kant struck back with an attackon Swedenborgian mysticism, Dreams of a Spirit-Seer. Just at this time, theearly 1760s, Herder got his start as pupil and acquaintance of both Kant andHamann—yet another instance of the pattern of network connections forgedbetween intellectuals prior to the creativity that would bring them fame. In1767, turning a favorite aesthetic concern in a new direction, Herder arguedthat the truest poetry is that of the people; in 1772 he won the Berlin AcademyIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 625prize with his theory of the origins of language. Herder made his mark beforehis own teacher, and prepared the way for the movement that would makeKant its greatest name.Now the Königsberg network begins to flow into the central network ofGerman intellectual life. In 1769 Herder met the 20-year-old Goethe on histravels, both of them a few years prior to their fame. When Goethe went toWeimar in 1775 as a court official, his first move toward building a literarycircle was to find a position for Herder. Goethe became the great energy starof German literature, and as with all such figures his reputation casts a glarethat makes it difficult to see how he became that way. Goethe’s life well fitsthe model that networks are the primary movers, and that individuals becomefilled with creative energies to the extent of their centrality when the networksreorganize around them.Goethe from early on was a gregarious seeker of other intellectuals, boththe bright young aspirants and the established names. A few years after meetingHerder, Goethe launched the Sturm und Drang movement with his dramaGoetz von Berlichingen about a rebel medieval knight; he quickly followedthis up in 1774 with a novel, Sorrows of Young Werther, which inspired a cultof romantic suicide protesting unrequited love and social convention. Goethebecame a wonder of creative longevity and far-flung virtuosity because hiscreations mirrored the modes of those around him in every phase of a proliferatingmovement. Schiller’s 1781 drama The Robbers glorifying revolutionwas a scandalous success. After he joined the Weimar circle in 1788, Goetheand Schiller became friends and collaborators in journal publishing, spurringeach other on. Schiller produced his quasi-Shakespearean history plays, whileGoethe produced his own tragedies and historical dramas and worked up themain part of Faust, incorporating themes of Spinozaist pantheism from onewing of the Idealist movement. When the Romantic circle popularized translationsof Shakespeare, Cervantes, and other foreign classics and produced itsown historical novels, Goethe turned his hand to the bildungsroman, producingWilhelm Meister. In 1810, at the height of the Naturphilosophie movement,Goethe published his Theory of Colors, an attempt to overcome mechanisticmathematicalNewtonian optics by means of a qualitative, even animistictheory of “the actions and sufferings of light” (Safranski, 1989: 178–184).Goethe of course was no mere imitator; he created by conflict and oppositionwithin the turbulent attention space, energized by contemporary enthusiasmswhile transmuting their materials into his own.Goethe was a center for network contacts that brought him all the culturalcapital at its point of emergence. To a large extent this was because he was aprime mover in assembling creative intellectual circles. Typically such groupscontain both an intellectual leader whose work publicizes the group and an626 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsorganizational leader who assembles the material conditions for members towork (Mullins, 1973). Goethe combined both roles. The ducal court at Weimar,with its nearby university at Jena, became a magnet in the attention space towhich Goethe’s creative energy attracted others; for many of them Goethefound a material base (Herder received a sinecure as state director of clergy,Schiller a position as history professor). These in turn sent out further resonances,generating creativity far beyond Goethe’s own interests, and sometimeseven opposed to them. Wieland, an old student friend of Goethe who beganthe wave of German Shakespeare translations, moved to Weimar and publishedthere his popular literary magazine, Teutscher Mercur; through this magazineKant’s work first became famous as the result of articles in 1786–87 by theJena professor Reinhold. Others introduced the teaching of Kantian philosophyinto Jena and founded a journal to publicize the Kantian viewpoint. By the1790s, Jena-Weimar had become a hotbed of rival groups, each with its ownjournal: Goethe and Schiller’s Die Horen, the Romantic circle’s Athenaeum, alittle later Schelling and Hegel’s Kritisches Journal der Philosophie.Jena-Weimar, of course, was not the only location where salons and magazinesexisted in Germany. It became the center by a process which is quitegeneral in the network theory of creativity. The highest level of creativity isdetermined by an intense focus of attention. One part of the network, initiallyquite dispersed, catches fire from a particular creative development, often afamous controversy. The first-mover advantage magnifies small beginnings; acircle grows ahead of others as it attracts attention and recruits, building upemotional energy locally and deference elsewhere. The first-mover advantagepasses the point of critical mass; what was once one local circle among othersnow is bathed in fame that blots out the rest.3 From a great distance we seeonly Kant, Goethe, Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. Viewed from closer up, thenetworks shouldering one another aside for position in the attention space arecrowded and rather breathless.The Idealist movement crystallized from networks all over Germany. Twoof Goethe’s early connections were at the flashpoints of the controversies whichbrought on the storm. The first incident was precipitated by Lavater, a Zurichpastor. In 1769 Lavater challenged Moses Mendelssohn to demonstrate thefalsity of Christian religious belief or to convert; Mendelssohn made a sensationwith his reply that Judaism itself is the religion of reason. Here we seeLavater, still rather early in his own career (his fame built up between 1768and 1778 for publications propagating enthusiastic mysticism as well as thenew science of physiognomy and fortune-telling), jumping into the publiceye by picking a controversy with the already famous; for Mendelssohn hadbeen the leader of the popular essayists at Berlin since the 1750s, a winner ofprizes from the Berlin Academy and defender of toleration and the separa-Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 627tion of church and state. The 1769 incident made an attention center out ofthe cleavage between rationalist Deists and sentimentalists. Soon afterwardsGoethe gave impetus to the latter by launching Sturm und Drang.4The literary network, far more than the philosophical one centered on theuniversities, was the cosmopolitan path for making rapid contacts, spreadingenthusiasm, and acquiring fame. The takeoff of Kantian philosophy came whenit was adopted by the core literary network; and the first big waves of philosophicalattention went not to Kant but to Jacobi, who used the literarynetwork to publicize Spinoza.The Spinozastreit, or Pantheism Controversy of 1785The second flashpoint is around Jacobi. He belongs to the same network: anacquaintance of Lavater, a friend of Goethe on the basis of previous familyconnections since both were young poets in the 1770s, Jacobi made his entréeinto the intellectual world on Goethe’s coattails. Jacobi pursued a career nottoo different from Goethe’s bread and butter as a lawyer-official at Düsseldorfon the lower Rhine. He was no literary success, but he kept aggressivelycultivating the network, on the Deist side as well as that of its opponents.Jacobi got himself into the confidence of Lessing, famous from the 1760sfor his aesthetic criticism and his dramas extolling the rational basis of allreligions, underlying Judaism and Christianity alike. After Lessing’s death in1781, Jacobi created a furor by publishing Lessing’s letters to Moses Mendelssohnand declaring that he had been a Spinozaist. The year was 1785, fouryears after Kant’s Critique but before Kant became famous. The ensuingquarrel in letters, pamphlets, and the major literary journals drew in not onlyMendelssohn and the Berlin Deists but also Goethe, Herder, and Hamann, agathering of the contemporary famous.Jacobi did not openly endorse Spinoza, but declared the latter’s monisticdeterminism the only rationally consistent philosophical position, while rejectingit as incompatible with Christian faith. Jacobi thereby shared in thepublicity of the intellectual focus of attention without attaching to himself theonus of unconventionality. Earlier, in the 1770s, Jacobi had used his knowledgeof Spinoza to impress the newly famous Goethe, who looked on Jacobi as aguide in his quest for a sympathetic philosophy of nature and spirit. As lateas 1784, just before Jacobi’s attack on Spinoza, he was conferring with Goetheand Herder at Weimar on Spinoza’s significance. And as Jacobi became thestorm center of attack on the new philosophy and maneuvered to draw thenon-polemical Kant into combat, he kept up an unctuous correspondence withthe very pro-Spinozaist Goethe; eventually, by cultivating Hamann, Jacobiengineered a friendly contact with Kant himself (Zammito, 1992: 230–237).628 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsJacobi leaves a strong impression of a man wanting above all to be in the centerof intellectual action, at whatever cost to personal consistency.Spinoza’s fame as a philosopher dates from this moment. He had been anunderground figure throughout the century, known through the caricature inBayle’s Dictionary, and increasingly as a heretical name bandied about in thequarrel between Deists and orthodox Christians. After Jacobi’s intervention,Spinoza’s became the main rival doctrine on Idealist terrain, used by manyIdealists as the dogmatic foil for their doctrine of freedom. Spinoza and Kant,the “dogmatic” determinist metaphysical system versus the “critical” subjectivism,became the two poles of German philosophy. Formerly regarded as anatheist, Spinoza was resurrected in the liberal religious context of the 1780sas a possible compromise between rationalist materialism and religion. By thisstroke Jacobi became Kant’s major rival for the attention of the philosophicalpublic.Jacobi’s move also upped the ante in the philosophical contest. He wassimultaneously making Spinoza intellectually respectable, no mere fringe figurebut the epitome of systematic rational metaphysics, while using Spinoza’sheretical reputation to discredit the entire project of mainstream philosophy.Jacobi’s was a heavy counterstroke against Kant’s new philosophy. Since intellectualconflicts create attention, by connecting Kant’s philosophy to the popularreligious-antireligious issue of the day, he also helped to make Kant famous.The controversy guaranteed that Kant’s critical position, limiting philosophyto the negative task of destroying the pretensions of metaphysics, would notremain stable. Spinoza was now the counter-position that Kant’s followerswould have to deal with, ambiguously appealing to political interests in liberationfrom religious dogmatism while simultaneously satisfying the desire fora romantic merging with nature.5If Kant is one hinge of the emergence of Idealism, Jacobi is the counterhinge.Opposition to the Kantians and Idealists unfolds simultaneously withthem, as an integral part of the field of conflictual forces. Jacobi produced thefirst anti-Kantian critique in 1787, almost simultaneously with its first widespreadrecognition. Using as his vehicle David Hume on Belief, Jacobi nowextolled Hume’s critique of causality and declared that Kant had failed to showhow causality could apply to the thing-in-itself. Hume was by no meansregarded as a famous philosopher until this time, but now both Kant and hisself-styled rival were declaring that all philosophy must answer Hume’s puzzle.One sees here a reason why Jacobi ultimately failed in his battle with Kant.Jacobi’s tactic was to revive old, underutilized philosophical ammunition. Hewas responsible for creating the reputations of two intellectual giants, Spinozaand Hume, by moving them into the center of intellectual oppositions. Theprice Jacobi paid was his own independent reputation, while he played the partIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 629of animator of other figures upon the stage. Jacobi’s own solution to thething-in-itself was merely to declare it an item of miraculous faith, on a parwith other items of religion. As key opponent, Jacobi was as central as Kant.It was around these two energy poles that the networks of the older generationwere transformed into new intellectual tensions.Proliferation of the Idealist NetworkKant’s Critique of Pure Reason attracted little attention when it first appearedin 1781, leading him to restate the doctrine several times (1783, 1785) in morepopular form. Once the rivalries broke out, Kant’s reputation was assured.Kant became a magnet for critical opposition, which, far from destroying hispopularity, focused attention on it. Jacobi and Herder in the 1780s werefollowed by a flood of Kantian expositions, commentaries, and critiques.6 Kantwas energized by the attention; now in his 60s and 70s, he published critiquesof ethics, aesthetics, and teleology in 1788 and 1790 and a dozen books in the1790s, cashing in on fame to express his position on religion, world peace,educational reform, and other political questions.Königsberg became a center for pilgrimages by admiring followers. Amongthem was Fichte. He had been an undistinguished Jena theology student in theearly 1780s, then (like many others) a household tutor. He first made contactwith the central network in 1788, when in Zurich he met Lavater—the oldinstigator of intellectual action in the early days of the Deist-sentimentalistcontroversy.7 In 1791 Fichte made his long trek on foot to Königsberg to meetKant. Rebuffed at first contact, to gain Kant’s favorable attention Fichte wrote,in Kantian fashion, his Critique of Revelation. It was a shrewd judgment aboutfilling the slot in public attention, for Kant’s own writings on religion wereexpected—at the very time when the French Revolution was abolishing Christianity8—and Kant’s similar work appeared the following year as Religionwithin the Bounds of Mere Reason. Kant recommended Fichte’s work to hisown publisher; when it appeared in 1792, the printer omitted the author’sname, no doubt in order to promote sales, and it was initially mistaken for awork of Kant’s. Swept up by the enthusiasm of expectant audiences andentrepreneurial anticipations into identification with the most avant-gardetendencies of the Kantian movement, Fichte became famous. When Reinhold,the academic champion of Kantianism, resigned his professorship at Jena,Fichte was appointed to succeed him in 1794. Flushed by his success, in thatyear Fichte in his Science of Knowledge stepped beyond Kant’s critical restrictionof thought to the categories of the understanding, eliminated the thing-initself,and dialectically reconstructed metaphysics out of the process of criticism.On this turf there now proliferated a full-scale Idealist movement.630 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsControversial attention recruited new waves to the movement. In the late1780s the Tübingen theological Stift, the main center of orthodox theology,officially protested to Berlin the subversiveness of Kant’s work (Zammito,1992: 242). Negative counter-moves are as important as positive initiatives inbuilding the emotional energy of intellectual action. The local controversyattracted the attention of the rebellious young liberals Schelling, Hegel, andHölderlin, roommates there in the early 1790s, converts to Kantianism. Fichtevisited Schelling in 1795, attracted by the prospects of publishing in a journalconnected with the famous theological center. Quick to seize the new intellectualopportunities, the 20-year-old Schelling expounded his own version ofFichtean Idealism. Via a chain of sponsorship, this youthful Idealist movementsoon made its center at the literary and Kantian stronghold at Jena-Weimar.Schelling and Hegel found positions, after tutoring jobs, respectively as Extraordinarius(associate professor) and Privatdozent (lecturer) in 1798 and1801.Excitement breeds more excitement during those few years which constitutethe upward path of a movement. Soon everyone of sympathetic belief or hungryfor fame was flocking to Weimar and Jena. The so-called Romantic circlesprang up, a Bohemian colony practicing sexual libertarianism, centered onthe brothers Schlegel, who lived during 1795–1799 in Weimar and held academicposts at Jena. The Romanticists by and large continued the themes ofthe earlier literary movement. The elder brother, August Schlegel, provided themajor success of the movement with his translations of Shakespeare (1797–1810). Friedrich Schlegel was the firebrand of the movement, whose 1799 novelLucinde popularized Fichte’s Idealism and advocated the sexual rights ofwomen. The young novelists Tieck, Wackenroder, and Novalis published atthe height of this period, 1797–1800, extolling religious faith in an idealizedMiddle Ages. The Werther-like reputation of the group was enhanced whenNovalis died in 1801 at age 29 after an unhappy love affair with a 13-year-oldgirl, motifs soon to be popularized by Byron’s sister incest. In this circle theaustere technicalities of philosophy were superseded by aesthetic and religioussentiment. Schelling, with his cherubic good looks and his wunderkind intellectualeagerness, became an intimate of the circle and precipitated one of itsscandals when August Schlegel’s wife, Caroline, divorced him in 1803 to marrySchelling, 12 years her junior.The radicalism of these movements provoked opponents; but local controversiesonly encouraged migration to new centers. In 1799 Fichte was accusedof advocating atheism, and left Jena. The Romantic circle moved to Dresdenand then Berlin, where it burned itself out by 1801, but not before it was joinedby Fichte and Schleiermacher, a prominent preacher at the Prussian court. Jenawas gradually displaced by Berlin as the prime center. Fichte remained thereIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 631most of the time, delivering his famous Addresses to the German Nation in1807 at the Berlin Academy of Sciences to an audience which included Wilhelmvon Humboldt. In 1809 von Humboldt, as minister in the Prussian reformgovernment, founded the University of Berlin, naming Fichte professor ofphilosophy and its first rector in 1810. Schleiermacher simultaneously becameprofessor of theology, and later succeeded Fichte as rector after the latter’sdeath in 1814. Fichte’s chair was filled (after war-related delays) in 1818 byHegel. By the 1820s, the Idealist center at Berlin was in the routinized phaseof normal science, and it was here in the 1830s that the Hegel school wouldundergo its splits.As the network and its centers burgeoned and broke apart, intellectualpositions were splitting and realigning as well. As in any successful intellectualmovement, control of the dominant attention space was subject to the law ofsmall numbers. The victorious side had room for sub-splits upon which rivalcareers could be made. The earliest manifestation was the rupture between theKantians and Fichte’s Idealism. By 1799 Kant had repudiated Fichte’s doctrines.Idealism now was the crest of the surging wave, the center of attentionand emotional enthusiasm, and the older anti-Kantian opposition began torally behind Kant himself as a more modest defense against Idealist extremes.The main Idealist opposition now interpreted Kantian categories as facts ofhuman psychology rather than as transcendental. Following this path, Bouterwek(1799, 1806) produced a psychologistic compromise between the out-andoutIdealists and scientific materialists. Fries (1803) tied Kantian doctrine tothe exact sciences; Herbart, the most important later opponent of the Idealists,pioneered empirical research in psychology.This opposition acquired its own centers. Göttingen had been the leadingcenter of academic scholarship since the 1770s, especially historical philologyand mathematics. Now it housed anti-Idealists: Lichtenberg, a mathematicsprofessor who satirized Sturm und Drang sentimentalism, as well as Schulze,Bouterwek, and Herbart. The pre-Jena center became anti-Jena and lateranti-Berlin. The most eminent in exploiting the anti-Idealist space was Herbart,a former Jena student of the early 1790s, who found a distinctive space from1802 on in refusing to go along with the Idealist tide. As the Idealists splitfrom the Kantians, Königsberg became another oppositional center.The old battle lines of rationalists versus sentimentalists were now almostcompletely eclipsed. The Idealists, led by Fichte, had become religious radicals.Whereas Kant reduced religion to ethical practice, Fichte, whose philosophymade the entire world into a phenomenon of spirit, verged on promoting anentirely new religion, blending humanitarian political reform with universalspiritual enlightenment. This position was assailed by orthodox Christians,while the middle ground was seized by the theologian Schleiermacher, whose632 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsOn Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured Despisers (1799) used Romanticistenthusiasm to combat Enlightenment rationalism. The Berlin Deist circle didnot fade away without a battle: Mendelssohn tried to refute Kant’s argumentsagainst a rational proof of God; Nicolai, a veteran who had mounted satiricalattacks on Goethe, Hamann, Lavater, Herder, and Jacobi, in the 1790s accusedKant and Fichte of being crypto-Catholics (Beiser, 1987: 105–108). But Deismfell from fashion, squeezed out of the attention space by the new lines ofconflict. In the end, Mendelssohn’s daughter married Friedrich Schlegel, carryinga connection with the prestige and creative energy of the Aufklärer intothe camp of their Romantic opponents.The Idealists, now proliferating even faster than the Kantians, soon underwenttheir own sub-splits. Schelling, originally one of Fichte’s disciples, in1797–1800 turned philosophy to encompass the forefront of research in naturalscience. Magnetism and electricity had been hot areas of scientific discoveryfrom Galvani in the 1780s through Volta’s electric cell in 1799. For Schelling,what appears as the objects of nature are dynamic processes based on attractionand repulsion, paralleling Fichte’s dialectic of consciousness positing andresolving oppositions. Chemistry was theorized around the polarity of acidsand bases, mechanics as quantitative oppositions of forces, biological life asthe unrestricted struggle of these forces. The universe is a world Soul, a unityof mutually conflicting forces. In astronomy the cosmos was theorized asthe periodic expansion and contraction of the Urmaterie, primary matter.Schelling’s Naturphilosophie attracted many followers among German scientistsfrom the early 1800s through the 1820s, affecting biological studies evenamong scientists who later returned to the materialist fold.9Ever sensitive to the unfolding of network opportunities, Schelling movedon to other positions. Among the Weimar stars was Schiller, who capped hisreputation as a liberal dramatist by moving onto philosophical turf in 1793–1795 and expounding a Kantian interpretation of art and poetry. FollowingSchiller’s lead, in 1800, at the emotional peak of the Romantic circle, Schellingconverted to aesthetic Idealism. He now elevated the aesthetic faculty asunifying all the other faculties of mind (rational, moral, intuitive); ultimatemetaphysical reality could be directly perceived through the eyes of the artist,and the aesthetic perception of nature became emblematic of the highestphilosophical insight. It was in this version that Idealism became popularabroad: spread by Coleridge (who visited Germany in 1798–99 with Wordsworth),it was adopted by the Romantic poets Shelley and Keats in England,and later by the New England Transcendentalists. In 1801–1803 Schellingrapidly added a religious dimension to what he now called Absolute Idealism,giving a theological interpretation to his doctrines of nature and of aestheticintuition.Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 633Then Schelling’s 15-year flareup of creativity in the center of public attentionabruptly ended. After breaking with the Idealist network, Schelling ceasedpublication after 1809. He continued to lecture on the history of mythologyas a poetic unfolding of the nature of God and hence of the cosmos. Schelling’sreligious phase, too, found disciples, notably von Baader (another miningengineer) in the 1820s. Schelling left a trail of network disciples behind him;after 1810, these movements based on his older positions were carrying alongon their own, overshadowing Schelling’s own later position in the attentionspace.The Crisis of the Law of Small NumbersBy the first decade of the 1800s, there was altogether a considerable lineup ofpositions: Kant’s critical philosophy; the psychological–scientific realist versionof Kant developed by Herbart and others; Fichte’s dialectical Idealism; Naturphilosophie;aesthetic Idealism; Schleiermacher’s Idealist Christianity; and generallyoutside the fold of all these philosophical movements an increasinglyself-consciously orthodox religiosity, which founded itself on fideism and traditionalismalone. These total seven positions, pushing the upper limits of thelaw of small numbers. How then do we account for the emergence of two moremajor thinkers, Hegel and Schopenhauer? The comparison between the successof one and the longtime failure of the other is instructive.Hegel entered the scene relatively late.10 His first important work (1801)pointed out the difference between Fichte’s and Schelling’s systems, precipitatinga break between them. The topic shows that Hegel was well attuned to theshifting niches in the core of the intellectual field. As Schelling’s old roommateand closest friend, Hegel had very good network connections, but he waseffectively blocked from taking an independent position as long as he remainedin Schelling’s camp. By 1806, the lineup was changing. Schelling, so to speak,was a niche hog; he had already gobbled up two of the available slots out ofthe six allowed by the law of small numbers, and in 1803 was upstaging evenhimself by proposing a third position, Absolute Idealism. This also moved himcloser to the orthodox religious camp, along with the rest of the Romantics.Now Hegel sensed the opening of a slot: it was Fichte’s dialectical Idealism,no longer being creatively developed by anyone. Since his great Wissenschaftslehreof 1794, Fichte had continued to publish prolifically, but largely ontopics of popular controversy: the French Revolution and later the nationalrevolt against Napoleon’s conquest of Germany, religious crisis, political andeducational reform. Fichte was devoting himself to being the organizationalleader rather than the intellectual leader of the movement, politicking for anew material base, which would soon become the reformed university at Berlin.634 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsIn 1807 Hegel published his Phenomenology of Spirit, which develops Fichte’sdialectics as applied to the historical unfolding of the world spirit, especiallyin social forms. Now Hegel had found his groove: the Logic (1812–1816) andEncyclopedia of Philosophical Science (1817) spelled out his system in scholasticdetail, and in 1821 his last published work applied the system to lawand the state in The Philosophy of Right.The intellectual reorganization is paralleled by a split in the networks. TheJena circle had been breaking up, and Schelling was palpably moving into adifferent set of connections: the network of religious and political conservativeswho had been the enemies of Kant and Fichte. Fichte had already departed in1799, followed soon by the Romantics. In 1803 Schelling went as full professorto Würzburg in the conservative state of Bavaria, then in 1809 left theuniversities entirely to join the Bavarian Academy of Science. Jacobi hadalready moved to Munich in the 1790s, becoming president of the Academyof Sciences, 1804–1812. When Schelling joined him in Munich, the tentativesplit from the other Idealists crystallized into an opposition center to theJena-Berlin mainline. Other fragments of the old Jena-Weimar camp alsomoved sharply to the right in politics and religion; in 1809 Friedrich Schlegelconverted to Catholicism and became secretary to the arch-conservative Metternichin Vienna.The old wunderkind Schelling had removed himself from the world ofIdealist philosophy, with its rationalism and its system-building tools. Hehad removed himself too from Idealist politics, which was a rational reformism,extending to an anti-traditional reform of religion. On every point nowSchelling was in the opposition. When Hegel arrived at Berlin, it was as theproponent of the rational constitutional state as consolidator of the accomplishmentsof the age of revolution. When Schelling finally made it back intothe Berlin mainstream in his old age, in 1841–1846, it was as the chosen agentof political and religious reaction. In this too Hegel carried on Fichte’s slot: forboth of them the dialectical tools and the system constructing were turned mostnaturally to progressive political reform. A generation later, when the Idealisthegemony was over and its capital was being redistributed once again amongthe factions, Marx and Engels became prominent by reviving the Fichte-Hegelslot, with all its social and political resonances.So much for Hegel over Schelling; what of Hegel over Schopenhauer? Thekey is the tremendous crowding of intellectual competition during this period,in a situation which raised extraordinary hopes of intellectual leaps from ragsto riches. Hegel began with polemics against a host of rivals; it seemed almosteveryone had his own system. Under the constraints of the law of smallnumbers, most were bound to be disappointed. Characteristic of many wasKrause, a Dresden neighbor of Schopenhauer in 1815–1817. His system ofIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 635Idealism was ignored in Germany, but managed to attract attention amongliberal reformers in Spain. Doubtless because of the crush of competition, atthis time the popular image emerged associating genius with mental illness. (Ingeneral the evidence shows no such association: creativity deteriorates withmental illness; Herbert, 1959). The Jena-Weimar creative circle was one of thelargest on record; the notable names, when we count the Romantic circle, theKantian publicists, their connections in Königsberg, Berlin, Göttingen, andelsewhere, as well as the anti-Idealist critics, add up to 30 or more in therunning for attention. The competition was mitigated to some extent byspecialization, through less than usual because literary and philosophical concernsand channels of publication overlapped to a considerable extent. Intellectualcompetition in this period was as intense as at any time in history, andmany creative thinkers were squeezed out of attention. That is why thisgeneration accounts for so many of the famous cases of neurotic breakdownsand misanthropic withdrawals.Hölderlin started out with the same trajectory as Schelling and Hegel.Beginning in the Tübingen group, turned on by contact with Fichte, he wassponsored by Schiller to a position at Jena, where he tried to lecture inphilosophy. But he failed to be accepted in the Weimar circle and left in 1795.In addition to his poems (for which he eventually became known), he wrote aphilosophical novel (like so many of the others) but was ignored by his contemporaries.11 After moving about as a tutor, by 1804 he had gone insane andnever wrote again. Compare Novalis, who was more successful in gaining thefriendship of Goethe, Schiller, and the Schlegels; as the Romantic circle wasbreaking up in 1801, he died of consumption. Yet another example is theplaywright and poet Kleist, who left the army to devote himself to intellectuallife in 1799, and shot himself in 1811 at the age of 41. Up against the law ofsmall numbers, many individuals cracked under the strain; early deaths toocan be interpreted as results of the structural crunch.The most famous of its victims was Schopenhauer. He is often regarded asanother such neurotic genius, with his misogyny, his avoidance of company,and his violent outbursts. But these are traits of Schopenhauer while he wasexperiencing the “structural crunch” of intellectual competition, not of hisearly life, full of cultivating good network ties and feeling the hopeful surge ofcreativity.12 Conversely, one might question how Schopenhauer managed toproduce first-rate creativity at all, given that the slots were closing down forhim. The answer lies in the networks. Schopenhauer had very good resourcesand network connections, with both the Idealists and their opponents, but hecame onto them very late. He was born in 1788; by the time he was educated,the available attention slots were already filled. When he arrived at Weimar in1807, the old circle was still a lively memory. His heiress mother had recentlymoved to Weimar and hosted the literary circles there, and through her636 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsSchopenhauer was exposed to Goethe.13 The young Schopenhauer made afavorable impression on the aging Wieland, whose journal had launched theKantian movement 25 years before. His ambition buoyed by his sponsorship,Schopenhauer visited all the famous centers; he studied at Göttingen in 1809–10 under the old oppositional critic Schulze and the psychologistic KantianBouterwek, then in 1811 heard Fichte lecture in Berlin; he presented hisdissertation for a degree at Jena in 1813, as if to identify himself with the oldmovement.The slot which Schopenhauer spied, now that the psychologists had preemptedthe Kantian heritage, was a return to Kant. But he was too ambitiousmerely to repeat Kant. He transformed the dualism of categories plus the thingin-itself into the dualism of representation plus will. Kant had always been aproponent of natural science; this naturalism was reinforced by Schopenhauer’sexposure to Goethe at a time when the Great Man had felt in need of supporton his neglected theory of colors. Just before working out his own system, in1816 Schopenhauer had collaborated with Goethe and produced a defense ofthe latter’s color theory. Schopenhauer’s much more original contribution, thatthe thing-in-itself is the will, came from philosophizing his own sexual experience.14 This blend of the personal with the philosophical, plus the iconoclasmof speaking openly about sexuality, was a heritage of the Romantic literarymovement, which was still echoing at Weimar when the young Schopenhauerarrived there. Schopenhauer’s creativity was in providing a philosophical slotin which this became crucial material.15Just as Schopenhauer was beginning to publicize his position, he foundhimself in a contest for attention with Hegel. He is famous for having attemptedto lecture at the same time as Hegel, making an abortive attempt toestablish himself as a Privatdozent at Berlin in 1820 and intermittently duringthe rest of Hegel’s life. Usually there were no listeners at all, sometimes one ortwo, while Hegel had a hundred or more. The attempt was not as arrogant asit seems in retrospect, for after Fichte’s death in 1814, there seemed a vacuumin the Idealist leadership. Naturphilosophie was regarded by many as tooextreme, Schelling’s current mythologizing was disreputable, and in the contestfor the Berlin appointment the Kantian Fries was for a while the favorite overthe relatively unknown Hegel.16 Although Hegel initially in 1818 attracted onlymodest numbers of pupils, his fame grew overwhelming in the 1820s. TheFichtean slot which he preserved and expanded had far more resonances andsources of alliance in the intellectual world than Schopenhauer’s iconoclasmand religious pessimism. To the extent that he was known, Schopenhauer wasmisperceived as a version of Fichte’s or Schelling’s will philosophy (Safranski,1989: 260). Supernumeraries outside the law of small numbers are penalizedby being seen through the categories of the dominant schools.By the time of his death in 1831, Hegel’s pupils dominated the Berlin center;Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 637along with Schleiermacher’s and Schelling’s students, they were to fill up mostof the creative activity for the following generation. (See the networks inFigures 13.1 and 14.2.) As this reality became apparent, Schopenhauer gaveup the contest and retired to Frankfurt to live off his personal fortune, neverto lecture again. His fame would come only in his old age, when the collapseof Hegelianism and Naturphilosophie opened up the reputational space again.Philosophy Captures the UniversityI have not yet explained why the Kantian movement should have appeared atthe time it did, nor indeed why it should have appeared at all. We see the oldernetworks transforming and taking on a new content; for a time this contentstirred enormous enthusiasm and generated a panoply of opportunities forcreativity. To understand this, we must move to the underlying material basewhich supports the networks. During the time of the Idealists, this base wasexpanding and transforming in Germany in a change that was laying downthe conditions for the modern intellectual.Before the academic revolution, the most important and best-known philosophershad for several centuries been non-academics. The chief materialbase for intellectual creativity was patronage. One might include in this selfpatronageof individuals such as Descartes or Bacon, wealthy enough tosupport their own writing, or Spinoza, a frugal middle-class version of thesame. Most typical was personal dependence on the aristocracy: Hobbes,household tutor in a Royalist family, and Locke, personal physician to theopposition leader Lord Shaftesbury, are structurally in the same position. After1690 or 1700, there was some shift toward collective forms of patronage.Leibniz, an intellectual and organizational entrepreneur par excellence, spreadthe organizational form called the academy through central Europe, by whicha prince established a material endowment for a group of intellectuals, therebygiving a measure of autonomy and permanence to their activities. Another suchform of patronage was the custom of rewarding intellectuals with posts at thedisposal of the government. This was particularly prominent in Britain as thepolitical spoils system set in with parliamentary dominance. Berkeley andHume both did a good deal of chasing patronage appointments, the former inthe church, the latter most successfully in diplomatic service. In Germany ofthe Kleinstaaterei, apart from the Academy at Berlin, prominent intellectualsfound positions as government officials under sympathetic princes (e.g., Lessingas a court librarian, Herder as superintendent of Lutheran clergy, Goethe ascourt counselor).This is not to say that academic positions did not exist. But they werelow-paying, low-prestige, and generally trammeled by pressures for religious638 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsorthodoxy. In Scotland, where the universities were an exception to the lowcondition elsewhere, intellectual life was more flourishing, but even there whattook place in the chairs of philosophy tended to be pulled toward the magnetof the secular subjects found outside in the political world, while the morereligiously orthodox (Reid, Beattie, Campbell, all connected to the clericalstronghold at Aberdeen) fought back philosophical innovations in the name oftraditional religion and common sense. In the German universities, followersof Leibniz such as Wolff and Baumgarten wriggled between medieval scholasticismand the attacks of Pietists; their career troubles underlined the motivationof younger German intellectuals to seek their fortunes in modern bases ofsupport outside the universities. In France, the Sorbonne was the bastion oftheological orthodoxy, while provincial universities were mere shells with fewstudents, places to purchase quick degrees on the cheap (Ariès, 1962: 201;Verger, 1986).If there was an alternative to the patronage system during the 1700s, itwould have appeared to contemporaries as the market for books and magazines.There was a rapid expansion of the publishing market in Germanyduring the 1770s, and the Sturm und Drang period of literature constituted asensationalized advertising that went along with the outbreak of this middleclassmarket. By 1770, titles in German came to number twice those in Latin,reversing the situation of the previous century; secular literature for the firsttime outstripped religious publications. In France, the greatest publishing enterpriseup to its time was the Encyclopedia (1745–1772); multiple volumesemployed a staff of hundreds, and the circle of writers gathered around it wasthe catalyst of creativity for virtually everyone of importance in Rousseau’sgeneration. It took some time for the patronage and the publishing systems tobecome distinct. Early in the century, the main intellectual circles in Englandwere grouped around the Whigs and the Tories. These groups publishedperiodicals and sponsored books. Political connections remained crucial becauseadvance subscriptions from the wealthy were a key to a writer’s fortune,and a political appointment would usually reward a writer who did honor, andideological service, to his political faction.17The publishing market did not encourage intellectuals to pursue autonomousconcerns on a high level of abstraction; the attraction was towardpartisan polemic, literary style, and topical public issues. The anti-metaphysicaland in general anti-philosophical tone which characterized the writings fromthese secular bases of intellectual production was a result. Antagonism totraditional philosophy was enhanced by the struggle over religion. Secularintellectuals, having found bases free from dependence on the church, criticizedthe theologians and biblical scholars of the old religious establishment, andtarred metaphysics with the same brush. Abstract philosophy became emblem-Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 639atic of the old church-dominated intellectual base and ideological target ofattack from the new intellectual base. Secular bases, close to lay audiences orlay patrons, brought about a de-differentiation of the intellectual role; thephilosopher (or specialist in abstract ideas) now tended also to become thewriter of literary entertainments and the political partisan. In contrast, thespecialized role of philosopher within the medieval university had been to takecharge of a technical portion of the curriculum. Because of the institutionalchange toward the popular literary market in combination with lay patronage,during this period one finds the predominance of the literary intellectual.18Revolt of the Philosophical FacultyThe academic revolution pioneered in Germany marked a revival and reformof the medieval organization of higher education. The medieval university wasa stronghold of the church, training priests and theologians; it also combined,in lesser or greater degree in various places, with guilds monopolizing theteaching of law and medicine, under the legitimation and control of the church.Given that after 1700 the church had lost its monopoly on the production ofculture, what significance was there in reviving the university? To understandthe question, it is desirable for us as modern intellectuals, and hence productsof universities, to divest ourselves of hindsight which makes us take for grantedthe inevitability of this institution.In the 1700s the university was nearly abolished. The ideological tone, especiallyamong self-consciously progressive intellectuals, was to regard universitiesas outdated and intellectually retrograde.19 Leibniz in 1700 had proposedthat universities be replaced by government-regulated professional schools,with academies taking over the preservation and extension of science and highculture. The same proposal was made by the Prussian reform minister vonMassow in 1806. This is in fact what the French had done in 1793, replacinguniversities with a system of academies together with government écoles forengineers, teachers, and other specialists.To abolish the university would not have meant abolishing education. Whatsignificance, if any, could there have been to preserving the organization whosemain distinction was that it was traditionally under church control? The 1700swere a period of expansion in secondary schools: in Germany, Gymnasia forclassical subjects, Ritterakademie for aristocratic manners; in France, the Jesuitcolleges which spread widely to serve the middle classes or even lower; inEngland, the elite Public Schools. Here again we must guard against anachronism.Today we take it for granted that there is a sequence, that one attendssecondary school in order to prepare for the university. Before the Germanuniversity reform, however, these two types of schooling were alternatives or640 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsrivals (and in fact the age range of the students tended to be similar in each;Ariès, 1962: 219–229). The “secondary” schools taught a largely secularizedcurriculum, appealing to the cultural aspirations of its clientele. This madethem much more popular than the universities, whose curricula and credentialingsequence had been built up during the Middle Ages in connection withtheology and careers in the church.In Germany, the growing sense of crisis in the late 1700s was based on acareer problem for university graduates. The church, deprived of its propertyin the Reformation, was no longer a lucrative career. Parsons had low statusand pay, and served as minor functionaries of the state, keeping local recordsand reading decrees from the pulpit. Theology and its preparatory subject,philosophy, attracted mainly sons of peasants, petty shopkeepers, and clergy.The upper part of the middle class, the sons of urban patricians, the wealthiermerchants, and the civil servants, studied law, a much more costly course ofstudy. Although the number of nobles in the legal faculties was quite low, thegroup as a whole adopted a belligerently knightly style of behavior, emphasizingdrinking and carousing, centered on dueling fraternities, which offendedboth the moralists and the modernists in the larger population.At the same time, there was a structural attraction based on the newinvolvement of the bureaucratic state in education (Rosenberg, 1958; Mueller,1983). Enrollments in the leading universities rose after 1740, fueled by prospectsof government employment at several levels. The bureaucratic administrationof the numerous absolutist states of Germany, both large and small,was expanding; in the late 1700s the proportion of officials to population wastwice as high as it would be 100 years later. Educational requirements becameincreasingly important for these posts; in Hanover (where Göttingen waslocated), the proportion of government appointees who had some universityeducation rose from 33 percent to 75 percent during the 1700s. At a lowerlevel, new employment possibilities were held out by the establishment ofcompulsory state-supported elementary schools, first by a Prussian decree of1717, which was largely unenforced, then by a stronger decree in 1763, whichspecified schools teaching in the German language rather than the old medievalLatin schools run by the church.The numbers of university students increased sharply by the 1770s butunevenly, provoking equally rapid declines in some places. Competition in theexpanding educational market produced both winners and losers. A populationof the educated underemployed accumulated, building a sense of alienationand status hunger which resonated with Sturm und Drang. The venerableUniversity of Cologne, one of the biggest in the early 1700s, had lost half itsstudents by the late 1770s; Jena dropped from 1,500 to 400. With the politicalcrisis of the 1790s, the university crisis came to a head. Numbers fell to tinyIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 641levels: Königsberg in 1791 (the height of Kant’s fame) had only 47 students;Erfurt in 1800 had only 43; Kiel in one year had 8. Jena, despite its intellectualeminence, was closed for a time after the nearby battle in 1806. During thecrisis period of the Napoleonic wars and their aftermath (1792–1818), 22 ofthe 42 German universities were abolished. The traditionalistic Catholic universities,about one third of the total, were hit particularly hard; only onesurvived. In the early 1700s there had been about 9,000 students in the 28universities then existing; in the 1790s, with more universities competing, thetotal was down to 6,000 (Schelsky, 1963: 22–23; McClelland, 1980: 28,63–64). Among “progressive” officials and thinkers, the opinion was widespreadthat the entire system should be abolished.It would have been feasible, as well as culturally fashionable, to abolish theold religious universities entirely and replace then with a new system of “highschools” for general cultural status, together with professional schools formore specialized training. This did not occur, because an intellectual movement,led by the status-squeezed aspirants of the philosophical faculty, revivedthe prestige of the university as the center of creative thought; and thatmovement, in turn, succeeded because it played on a structural trend underway in the organization of the German educational system. Prussia had alreadypioneered in state-mandated elementary schooling; bureaucratic centralizationalso was moving toward formalizing credential requirements and hierarchizingthe competing segments of the older educational system. In 1770 an examinationwas established for employment in the Prussian bureaucracy, placing apremium on university legal training. Nobles, however, were exempted at first,and university degrees were not absolutely essential. In 1804 this regulationwas strengthened to require three years of study at a Prussian university forall higher offices. With the foundation of the University of Berlin in 1810 andan accompanying series of official examinations, university legal study becamea rigorous requirement for government employment. Prussia thus became thefirst society in the West to establish anything like the Chinese imperial examinationsystem.Together with another Prussian reform initiated in 1788, and strengthenedby 1810–1812, these regulations linked the entire educational system into acredentialing sequence (Mueller, 1987: 18, 24–26). In an effort to limit thenumber of university students, the government established the Abitur examinationfor admission to the universities. This put a premium on study at aclassical Gymnasium, prior to this point more of an alternative to universityeducation than a preparation for it. For instance, in 1800 the director of theBerlin Gymnasium had proposed that the universities be abolished in favor ofhis institution. Now it became part of the state-controlled sequence, but at apreliminary level; conversely, after 1812–1820, to teach in a secondary school642 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswhich prepared students for the university one needed a university degree. Theresult of this formalization was simultaneously to cut the numbers of applicants,especially the unemployed intellectuals, while improving the prospectsfor wealthier students. The university became locked into the apex of thecredentialing sequence that, since the worldwide spread of the German model,we have come to take for granted.Is it not arbitrary which organizational form won out? If no universityreform had taken place, there would still have been general cultural education,professional training, plus places where specialized scientists and scholarswould pursue their work. What contribution if any does the preservation ofthe medieval university structure make to the role of modern intellectuals andto the content of their work? The key is that the medieval university hadacquired a good deal of autonomy from lay society to create its own topicsand methods of argument. It was the medieval university as a self-governingcorporation which created the scholastic hierarchies and competitions manifestedin the style and content of the academic disciplines. The medievaluniversity was responsible for the field of philosophy as an abstract discipline,conscious of the methods and contents which make up the various regions ofthe intellectual field. It was the university structure, shaped by generations ofturf battles over the space for intellectual debate in the preliminaries to theologyand law, that crystallized the self-conscious enterprises of logic, metaphysics,and epistemology. Without the university structure, the role of the generalpurposeintellectual—that is, the philosopher—de-differentiates back into thelay conception of culture. The level of abstraction and of self-reflection is lost;instead one has the literary or political intellectual, engaging sometimes in arapid play of ideas, but deterred by the lay audience from exploring anythingin depth. The development of philosophy in a technical sense depended on thesurvival of the university.The university reform revived another strength of the medieval system atits height: its structural impetus to creativity. The German university revolutioncreated the modern research university, where professors were expected notonly to teach the best knowledge of the past but also to create new knowledge.This impetus toward innovation came from the structure of competition institutionalizedwithin the medieval university: the public disputation; the dissertationand its defense, which made one a full-fledged academic professional;the competition with other professors and other universities to attract students.It was these competitive, innovation-provoking structures which the university’sEnlightenment rivals lacked. The eighteenth-century college or Gymnasiumtaught a finished culture to students who were not expected to go onto become autonomous producers in their own right; in the same way theprofessional school was in the business of transmitting a finished body ofIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 643information to lay audiences who would then apply it. Only the academies ofscientists or artists were expected to create new works. But in fact the centralizedstructure of collective patronage did not stimulate creativity very well;particularly in France, the great academies tended to be places for display ofhonors, for ceremonialism and rather traditionalistic standards as to contents(Heilbron, 1994). The centralized patronage system, lacking the internal autonomyand ongoing competitiveness of the university faculties, tended to degenerateinto awards for the socially eminent and bastions of the intellectuallyconservative.The key battle, fought out in Germany from the 1780s to the early 1800s,was to reform the position of the philosophical faculty within the university.Traditionally it had constituted the preliminary or undergraduate training forthe higher faculties of theology, law, and medicine, and its teachers occupieda correspondingly lower level of pay and prestige. The reform made thephilosophical faculty into a full-fledged higher faculty, claiming to teach themost advanced subjects, and with autonomy from the restrictions formerlyimposed by the theologians.20 This meant that the exercise of reason by its ownlights was to be free of the guidance of doctrine and orthodoxy. A similar battlehad been fought out in the medieval universities, and a good deal of creativeenergy went into maneuvering between the rival claims of reason and faith.The edict of 1277, which had enforced the superiority of theology and legislatedagainst the encroachments of the philosophers, had beaten back a revoltof the philosophy teachers (i.e., the arts faculty) which was heading in thedirection later consummated by the German university revolution. A little morethan 500 years later, the arts faculty triumphed.With the success of the university revolution, the university graduallyasserted its superiority over the alternative bases of research and innovation.Scientific research, carried out by wealthy amateurs or under the support ofpatrons, was upstaged as soon as universities underwent sufficient internaldifferentiation to provide bases for the scientific specialties.21 In philosophy,which is our central concern here, the university-based competitive structuresquickly established a level of sophisticated conceptualization that dominatedthe attention space over the cruder argumentation of lay-oriented intellectuals.Since the German academic revolution, virtually all notable philosophers havebeen professors. The generalization is a loose one; a more precise way to sayit is that within each national culture, as soon as it underwent a German-styleuniversity revolution, the academic philosophers took over the center of attentionfrom philosophers outside the university.22In England, the universities did not undergo the reform until 1872. Priorto that time dons had to be clerics, and higher research topics were subordinatedto an undergraduate-oriented instruction in the classics. Independently644 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscreative philosophers in England thus preserved something like the Enlightenmentstyle much longer than in Germany. The Utilitarians (at their height from1810 to 1830) were amateurs, connected to law practice or business. Theirsuccessors at midcentury, mediated by John Stuart Mill (a typical amateurpolymath, based at the East India Company), were the evolutionist circlearound Huxley and Spencer. These two interconnected circles controlled themain centers of the now greatly expanded publishing industry; they edited thenew political-literary journals such as Westminster Review and The Economistas well as the Encyclopedia Britannica. Spencer made a fortune by publishingin effect an encyclopedia of his own. Others of the period were the wealthyamateur Buckle, famous for his materialist determinism, and Carlyle, successfulas a flamboyant and sentimentalist popular writer. We see here a continuationof the anti-metaphysical, militantly secularist themes of the lay thinkers of theprevious century.In the United States, the university reform was begun in the late 1870s and1880s by sojourners importing the model from Germany. Prior to this, notablephilosophy was amateur: the New England Transcendentalists in the 1830sand 1840s and a Hegelian circle at St. Louis in the 1860s and 1870s. In thiscase philosophy was not anti-religious, and in its content it even constitutedan offshoot of the German philosophies, but it had the mark of amateurthinkers nevertheless. The major Transcendentalists were literary-philosophicalhybrids, poet-essayists like Emerson and Thoreau; their methods were far fromthe critical and dialectical techniques of the Germans, instead extolling apopularized aesthetic nature-religiosity.23If amateur philosophy remained intellectually non-differentiated and nontechnical,wherever the university revolution occurred there was an upsurge oftechnical, metaphysically oriented philosophy. After the initial wave, usuallyin Idealist form, there were further developments; but now philosophy wasdistinctively academic, technically rigorous, and remote from the popularisticappeals of the lay-based philosophers whom it displaced.The terrain of philosophy is that of the all-purpose intellectual, concernedwith questions of widest interest; thus the role of “philosopher” will existwhether there is an academic position by this name or not. The non-academicphilosopher, however, does not construe the realm of foundational issues as adistinctive ontological field, but tends to concretize it; metaphysics is replacedby the substantive contents of some other discipline—science, literature, socialtheory, reasoned political ideology. Marx, moving from his youthful academiccareer to political journalism and agitation, took a predictable path in transformingHegelian philosophy into political economy. When Marx felt that hewas turning Hegel’s system from its head to its feet, he was passing throughthe reversal of perspectives typical of the division between the autonomy ofIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 645academic philosophy and the lay orientation of non-academic intellectuals. Thesame thing had happened a century earlier, when Adam Smith wrote on moralsentiments while he held the chair of moral philosophy at Glasgow, butswitched to popular concerns of economics when he moved into Continentalcircles as companion to a duke.24Academicization promotes technical philosophy; but why should it comeabout by way of Idealism, against the grain of virtually every progressiveintellectual for generations? German Idealism was one of the greatest efflorescencesof Idealist thinking in all of world history. Moreover, in contrast to theIdealisms of India or of Greek Neoplatonism, or even the reactionary Idealismof Berkeley, which tends to treat the material world as an illusion, GermanIdealism claimed to be able to derive the laws governing the empirical world,scientific and historical alike, from the principles revealed in the Absolute. ThisIdealism was not world-escaping but world-dominating; it made as ambitiousa claim to intellectual power as anything ever proposed.The key to the puzzle is that Idealism was the ideology of the universityrevolution. In support of this premise are four kinds of evidence: (1) the majorGerman Idealists were among the prime movers of university reform; (2) thecontents of the Idealist philosophies justified the reform, and the succession ofmajor Idealist positions closely corresponded to contemporary prospects of thereform movement; (3) the French Revolution, as surrounding context, producedan Idealist ideology of spiritual freedom only in Germany, where itmeshed with the interests of the university reformers, whereas by contrast inEngland and France the chief ideologies of the revolutionary period wereneither Idealist nor university-oriented; and (4) whenever the German universityreform was adopted elsewhere, a generation of Idealist philosophers appeared,often in indigenous form.Idealists as University ReformersThe creators of German Idealism were the leaders in the movement to reformthe university. Kant would have preferred for science to become the dominantsubject, but the university structure forced upon him an indirect path of reform.The low-status philosophical faculty had the largest number of positions; andwithin this faculty the most available chairs were in philosophy proper, thefewest in natural science. Leipzig, the biggest university of the time, had 12chairs in the philosophical faculty (as opposed to 4 in theology, 8 in law, and6 in medicine), of which 5 were in branches of philosophy and only 1 in ascience (mathematics); the remaining 6 were in humanistic subjects (Helbig,1961: 62). Kant’s path was to upgrade philosophy as leader of the scienceswhile simultaneously capturing the territory now occupied by theology. Inproposing a Copernican revolution in philosophy, he explicitly identified phi-646 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathslosophy with the methods of the sciences, whose advance Kant argued tookplace through intensified, systematic investigation rather than random observation,through theory rather than raw empiricism. Metaphysics was to berestored to its “royal place among all the sciences” (Kant [1781] 1966: A.vii),for it alone could answer Hume’s skepticism and demonstrate how scientificknowledge is possible. At the same time, religion—and even law—could survivein this secular age only with the support of philosophical reason.25 In1798, in his last published work, Der Streit der Fakultäten, Kant would go toon argue that philosophy has the task of establishing the limits and characterof knowledge in all other disciplines; it should judge the claims of theology,and not vice versa.26 For good measure, he threw in the claim of philosophyover the scope of law and medicine as well.Fichte, who widened the claims of Idealism beyond Kant’s critical method,was similarly aggressive in agitating for university reform. Simultaneously withthe announcement of his metaphysical system, in 1794 Fichte’s Lectures on theScholar’s Vocation argued for the negation of selfish and material interests andcalled on pure intellectuals as the saviors of the country. At Jena, Fichte createda storm by attempting to abolish the student dueling fraternities, emblems ofthe aristocracy-emulating, carousing style of the old universities, dominated bythe legal faculty. Other Idealists joined in; Schelling (in his 1802–3 Lectureson the Method of University Study) and Schleiermacher wrote and agitated forintellectual freedom and university reform. Hegel, concerned with educationalreform since the 1790s, put his plans into action during his Berlin period(Dickey, 1993: 306, 337; Harris, 1972: 1–47).In 1807 Fichte proposed a plan for reorganizing the universities. Theywould contain no vocational, professional training—exactly the opposite ofthe Enlightenment model of educational reform—but would offer generaleducation through philosophy, which would awaken understanding of theinterrelatedness of knowledge. Fichte himself would hold a seminar for professorsto tell them how to teach. Philosophy was to be a free inquiry and acritique of all other forms of knowledge (echoing Kant’s critiques). Fichte’snew university would educate the elite of the entire nation. In his 1808 Addressesto the German Nation, delivered at patriotic meetings in Berlin underFrench occupation, Fichte proposed that Germany would reattain greatnessnot through military but through spiritual might. He proposed to overcomedisadvantages of poverty by setting up a system of public schools, operated aseconomic cooperative communities, enrolling youths of all social classes. Atthe university the needy would be supported at state expense. Germany wouldbecome like Plato’s Republic, built around educational leadership. The universitydegree would give its holders claim to the most important positions in thestate, replacing the old hereditary aristocracy.It was Fichte’s program, stripped of its utopian politics, that Wilhelm vonIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 647Humboldt, one of Fichte’s audience in 1808, put into effect. The University ofBerlin was made a privileged corporation with self-government; professorswere given the right to choose their own subjects, without restrictions of astandard syllabus. The philosophical faculty received full equality in status andpay with the other faculties, and could now award advanced degrees. Fichtewas appointed first rector. After Fichte’s death, the leading Idealist theologian,Schleiermacher, took over as rector, and Hegel was brought to Berlin as Fichte’ssuccessor in philosophy.This is not to say that the University of Berlin bore the brunt of reformalone. Göttingen, founded in 1737, had already pioneered in the reorientationtoward creative research. Both Wilhelm and Alexander von Humboldt wereGERMAN UNIVERSITIES, 1348–1900(Boundaries are those of German Empire in 1872;dates are university foundations and closings)648 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsgraduates of Göttingen (as were the Schlegel brothers), and it was in part theGöttingen ideal that was expanded at Berlin and subsequently emulated by theother universities of the German states (Turner, 1974; Leventhal, 1986). Nevertheless,there was a special connection between the Idealists and the sweepinguniversity reform. Göttingen replaced the Latin and Greek classics of themedieval curriculum with lectures in German, and downplayed the theologicalfaculty in favor of modern literature; Göttingen was known especially for itspioneering research in philology. The Idealists, in contrast, resuscitated the coremedieval tradition of philosophy, and developed all the rational sciences (includingrational theology) within its orbit. Göttingen was too close to theEnlightenment culture to produce this kind of revival; it was a center forliterary criticism and popular literary publications, oriented more toward a layaudience than toward the academic world (Turner, 1974). Göttingen, as a solemodel, would likely have furthered the Enlightenment trend toward the disappearanceof academic culture and its absorption into the lay world.27The point is not that Idealism alone brought about the university reform,but rather that the strains of the old university system—above all the plight ofyoung aspirants in theology and hence in its traditional feeder discipline,philosophy—motivated Idealism. Jena and Königsberg, where the Idealistmovement began, were not particularly distinguished universities. By the sametoken, they were traditionalist places (as of course was the Tübingen theologicalStift, so central in the Idealist recruitment), where an effort to expand careeropportunities for philosophy students was eagerly awaited. Kant, Herder,Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, and Hölderlin were mostly men from modest socialbackgrounds, who owed their chances to the expanding public school system.28They all had in common the career experience of starting as a tutor in a privatehousehold—Kant for nine years, Fichte for ten, Hegel for seven—while waitingfor an academic post to open up. Kant waited until age 46 before getting aprofessorship, and so did Hegel, while Hölderlin never did find an academicpost.29 Such individuals were often attracted to the popular Enlightenmenttopics such as science or aesthetics; but such posts in the academic world wereless available than the established positions in philosophy, and those in turnpaid less than the high faculties of theology, law, and medicine. Kant wasarchetypal in finding that he could not afford a career in science, and thusgravitating toward the soft spot of philosophy on the theology track.The path of men such as Kant and Fichte, although arduous, was neverthelessa hopeful one, for it followed a track of educational expansion andreform that had been in place since the 1730s. It was these very reforms whichhad widened the recruitment base and brought about a surplus of aspirantsfor positions. If this generated a hunger for further reform, it was connectedto an expectation that the situation could improve if previous governmentalIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 649policies were extended or more fully implemented. When Kant proposed tomake the philosophical faculty arbiter of the other disciplines, he was carryingout a line which made academic careers in themselves superior to careers withinthe church; it simultaneously raised the power and prestige of those whopracticed academic science, and elevated their salaries to equal those of theother higher faculties. When Fichte envisioned university philosophers as a newspecies of philosopher-king, he was putting in the most flamboyant form thetendency for academic degree holders to monopolize entry into governmentadministration. The basis for these arguments had to be worked out in theconcepts of philosophical discourse; but the motivation for creating theseconcepts came from the realistic assessment that the structure was moving ina direction favorable to a self-governing academic elite. When other Germanstates emulated the Prussian model after 1810, there were no more universityfailures, and enrollments rose fairly steadily.30 The entire system went into aperiod of controlled expansion that lasted into the 1900s.Idealism as Ideology of the University RevolutionThe contents of Idealism supported the claim of intellectual autonomy anddominance by the philosophical faculty. The initial phase of Kant’s criticalphilosophy destroyed the claims of theology to know ultimate reality. It isimpossible to know the thing-in-itself, and any such claims lead to inescapableantinomies. There is no justification for religion except that which is providedby transcendental critique demonstrating the necessity of moral and teleologicalcategories of thinking. Kant’s critical philosophy also demonstrates that nofield can know the validity and limits of its own claims of knowledge untilthey have been examined by the transcendental methods of philosophy. Kant’srevolution simultaneously downgraded theology and raised philosophy to arbiterof all knowledge. Kant did not cut off the validity of any phenomenalfield of inquiry so long as its practitioners stuck to their delimited sphere. Heencouraged empirical research as well as philosophical investigations to revealhow laws of specific fields are related to the transcendental categories.Kant’s argumentation was a precipitate of conflicts within the networkssurrounding his career. Prominent was a three-way conflict among Pietists,Wolffians, and the Berlin Academy. Since the beginning of the century, Wolffianrationalists had made Leibniz’s position the dominant philosophy in Germanuniversities. The splits typical of intellectual life followed. A lineage of Pietistsand Thomasians, rival academics from the same Leipzig connections whichhad produced Leibniz, accused the Wolffians of determinism and atheism.Wolff and his follower Bilfinger were expelled from Halle in 1723 under theattack of Budde, Rudiger, and Francke. In 1740, with the accession of Frederick650 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe Great, the Wolffians were allowed to return; this led to a second round ofattacks, especially by Crusius, theology professor at Leipzig, the most prominentGerman university, and safely outside Prussian jurisdiction. Wolffianphilosophy also came under pressure on a second front. The Berlin Academy,though originally founded by Leibniz, gradually fell under the influence ofNewtonians, especially Maupertuis (at Berlin, 1744–1756) and Lambert(1764–1777). The scientific prestige of the academy rose to world class withthe presence of Euler (1741–1765), the leading mathematician of his time, andLambert, who introduced hyperbolic functions into geometry and proved thatpi is an irrational number. This put a good deal of pressure on the Wolffians,who generally taught university mathematics along with natural and moralphilosophy, to remain scientifically up-to-date.Kant was at the intersection of all three factions. His upbringing was Pietist,and he continued that sect’s antagonism to metaphysics and preference formoralistic rather than theological religion. His academic contacts and sympathieswere Wolffian; his teacher at Königsberg, Knutzen, was a Wolffian in aPietist university, an Extraordinarius for 23 years who was never made anOrdinarius. Throughout his career Kant taught from the Wolffian textbook ofBaumgarten, which provided much of the formal framework of the Critiqueof Pure Reason. For Kant, Wolffian rationalism was a bulwark against Pietistnature philosophy, which the followers of Thomasius propagated as a worldfull of occult spiritual forces, unamenable to mathematics. One might havethought that Kant would take the purely scientific route, made prestigeful bythe Berlin Academy; and indeed Kant in his early years was a Newtonian, andan eager participant in Berlin prize contests. His 1755 cosmogenic theory isbased on Newtonian principles of gravitational attraction, in a vein similar tothe work of Lambert. Kant’s career opportunities in the university were constrainedby the necessity to be an all-around teacher of the subjects within thephilosophical faculty, of which mathematics and natural science were lesssignificant than philosophy, and the best-rewarded route was into theology.Kant taught all these subjects, and as his prospects for a chair grew, heconcentrated increasingly on putting them into the framework of philosophy.The ingredients of Kant’s critical philosophy existed in these networksbefore Kant pulled them into a distinctive combination. Leibniz had alreadyheld that space and time are ideal rather than externally existent, mere aspectsof the order of monads (as indeed an abstract mathematician might see it). Theissue remained salient in the debate with the Newtonians, who held theabsolute existence of space. By 1770 Kant was expressing the Leibniz-Wolffdoctrine in the version that space and time are a priori categories of sensibility.31 Kant was not yet ready to say the same thing about causality, which wascentral both to Leibnizian philosophy (the principle of sufficient reason) andIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 651to empirical science. Nevertheless, the discussions of Bilfinger, Baumgarten, andon the other side the Newtonians and Pietists raised the issue of just howcausality might operate. For the Wolffians, the monads are windowless, causallyunable to affect one another; the observed laws of the physical universemust be due to preestablished harmony. This view was disliked by the Newtonians;but their doctrine of a direct external influence, especially the actionat-a-distance of gravitational force, appeared philosophically naive. A thirdsolution, Malebranchean occasionalism—the mediation of God—was too closeto the Pietist occultism that threatened university scientists on their home turf.These disputes convinced Kant that there are limits to understanding causalconnections among objects themselves. This material became the basis for theantinomies of reason in the first Critique.The first turning point for Kant took place around 1765. The issue hadbeen provoked by the Berlin Academy, which had proposed the prize questionwhether the principles of metaphysics and theology may be demonstrated withthe certainty of geometry. This was in effect Newtonian mathematical sciencethumbing its nose at both Wolffians and Pietists, and the prize contest attractedthe major thinkers in Germany. Mendelssohn won with an anti-metaphysical,anti-religious argument, Kant taking second place. Kant was suddenly overwhelmedwith skepticism. In his 1766 Dreams of a Spirit-Seer he rejected notonly Pietist occultism but rational metaphysics as well, on the grounds thatthere is no knowledge beyond sensory experience. Crusius in the 1750s hadalready made this claim in order to deny the validity of Wolffian metaphysics.Empiricist skepticism was further bolstered by Hume, whose arguments hadbeen introduced to Kant already in 1759 by Hamann (Beiser, 1992: 54), nodoubt in support of the same debate of sentimentalists against mere reason.Now Kant turned Crusius’s arguments back against the Pietists.A second turning point came soon after Kant finally won his philosophychair in 1770. Still struggling to save some power of reason to give knowledgeof the causal interaction of things-in-themselves, in his inaugural dissertationKant posited two faculties of knowledge, sensibility and reason, with substanceand causality inhering in the latter, beyond the sensory screen of space andtime. Again the Berlin connection raised difficulties. Lambert, Kant’s correspondentsince both had participated in the prize contest of 1764, pointed outthat if there are two such distinct faculties as sensibility and reason, how canthey ever cooperate? This raised in epistemological form the classic deeptrouble of how distinct substances could interact—in this case subjective mindand external object. Since Kant rejected preestablished harmony, Platonicintuition of essences, and other access to occult qualities, he was forced to finda new path.In 1770–1772 Kant put the final ingredient in place: the distinction between652 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathssynthetic and analytic a priori. Here too was a background, including Leibniz’salignment of physical relationships among monads with logical relations ofsubject and predicate, and more recently the questions of the nature of mathematicalknowledge stirred up by the 1764 Berlin prize question. Lambert’sentry had discussed what analysis meant in mathematics and attempted areform of Wolffian logic. Kant now took a new tack. Since Euclid, mathematicshad been regarded as an a priori science, independent of experience, and theprototype of certainty. In the view of Lambert and others, a priori necessity ismanifested only in the analytical method, which investigates the implicationscontained in its definitions and axioms (Coffa, 1991: 9–16). Such knowledgeis tautological. This was unacceptable to Kant, a practicing scientist ratherthan a pure mathematician, who wanted mathematical laws to express realrelations discovered by empirical research. Kant decided that mathematicsmust be synthetic rather than analytical, that is, providing knowledge whichis non-tautological, ampliative judgements (Erweiterungsurteile, in contrastto analytical judgments, which are merely clarificatory, Erläuterungsurteile).Judgments which are synthetic a priori are both certain and informative, goingbeyond mere knowledge of concepts. Since mathematical knowledge exists,there are no doubt such things as synthetic a priori judgments; by extension,this should prove the secure foundation for scientific laws.Kant regarded his discovery of the synthetic a priori as “the first step” inhis critical philosophy (Coffa, 1991: 15). In 1772 Kant announced to friendsthat he was on the path to a new philosophy, although it took another nineyears to work out a final draft. The ultimate step was to move causality andsubstance into the sphere of the a priori, along with space and time. This couldbe done if all were now regarded as categories of the understanding, imposedon experience, and through which all experience is filtered. But if the categoriesof causality and of time-space relationships, measurable by mathematics anddescribable in geometry, are a priori necessary in all experience, their a priorinessdoes not prevent them from revealing knowledge which goes beyond meresubjectivity, and beyond the tautological implications of concepts.Kant now had a critical tool capable of cutting off theological and spiritualistspeculation. At the same time, he believed that it validated not only sciencebut also the rightful activity of philosophy as the perfection of scientificresearch from the theoretical side. Early in his career Kant had proposed thenebular hypothesis of the origins of the planetary orbits by deduction fromNewtonian laws. Later, in the midst of his great Critiques, Kant went back toattempting to ground all scientific principles in the categories of time and spaceby way of intermediary concepts such as impenetrability and weight.32 Philosophymeets empirical science halfway; the principles discovered by science,although not dictated by philosophy, were to be progressively generalized andIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 653mathematized until they meshed with instantiations of the highest philosophicalcategories. In the end, Kant found a way to continue the project ofrationalist philosophers begun by Descartes and extended by Spinoza, Leibniz,and Woolf: to derive the principles of science from pure reason, at the sametime guaranteeing their autonomous empirical reality. What was different wasthat Kant required this rationalism to pass under the authority of a new masterdiscipline, critical epistemology.Reinhold’s Letters in 1786–87 made Kant famous by portraying the criticalphilosophy as a middle ground between theology and reason, that is to say,between Jacobi’s fideism on one side and Mendelssohn’s Deism or Spinoza’spantheism on the other (Di Giovanni, 1992: 427–429). Again the academictheologians were looking for help. Reinhold was a former Catholic teacherwho had converted to Protestantism after the Jesuits were suppressed in 1773;he now saw alliance with the new philosophy as offering ammunition fortheologians against both Deists and Pietists. The new opening, uniting philosophicaland theological turf, quickly appealed to theology students such asFichte, Schelling, and Hegel. Fichte was the first to see that Jacobi could beused as a stepping stone, and his writings often expressed admiration for Jacobifor pointing the way.Schultze’s Anesidemus of 1792, pressing the Humean skepticism pioneeredby Jacobi, had charged Kant with being unable to show why the unknowablething-in-itself exists, nor why there should be a sensory manifold at all. Eventhe categories of the understanding are not deduced but arbitrarily given. Likeall creative thinkers, Fichte seized on unsolved puzzles as a valuable possession,a territory on which to make his own mark. Kant had given the tools, whichFichte now explicitly flourished: the transcendental method of searching fornecessary presuppositions, and the synthetic a priori.33The search for presuppositional grounding Fichte ([1794–1997] 1982: 95–96) illustrated as follows: Take any true judgment, such as the undeniableprinciple of identity, A  A. To say that it is true implies that it is permanentlytrue; and this requires that there be a permanent subject or self for whom itis true. Fichte’s Cartesian starting point is logic, not the self, but it demonstratesimmediately the existence of the self, and in a far stronger version thanDescartes’s existent ego.Let us posit also what seems undeniable, the existence of a difference.Not-A implies that A is also posited. Not-A  not-A implies an A opposed tonot-A (Fichte, [1794–1997] 1982: 103–104). And by the previous argument,the grounding of oppositions must be the self. Any not-self implies also the self.Now Fichte brings in Kant’s other tool. The synthetic a priori guaranteesthat such deductions not merely are logical tautologies but have ontologicalconsequences as well. Kant had noted that concepts linked together by the654 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathssynthetic a priori, since they are not contained merely conceptually in oneanother, must be recognizable by a form of pure intuition or non-empiricalperception (Coffa, 1991: 17–19). Fichte widens the implications of pure intuitioninto a full-fledged Idealism. He works both synthetic and analytical apriori into a combined system. For Kant, analytical judgments are based onthe principle of contradiction, which, as Fichte notes, means that somethingcannot be A and not-A at the same time (Fichte, [1794–1997] 1982: 121,111–112). Fichte widens the analytical method: it consists in seeking aspectsin which things are opposed, which he now labels antithesis, making analysismore dialectical than it was in Kant. Synthesis is the discovery in opposites ofthe aspect in which they are alike. Thus both analysis (antithesis) and synthesis,or analytical and synthetic a priori, imply each other. Fichte emphasizes theradical consequences. There are no purely analytic judgments (a point echoedfive generations later by Quine in a logical positivist context which hadcompletely disowned Idealism). Bringing this line of argument together withFichte’s points just outlined, we find that all valid synthesis is based on orcontained in the synthesis of self and not-self.Here we have the formula thesis-antithesis-synthesis later used as a scholasticformula by Hegel’s followers. For Fichte, it is purely a set of mutualimplications, not a sequence which develops in time. (Obviously for a Kantian,time is merely a category of sensory understanding.) Fichte draws out theimplications of Kant’s synthetic a priori. Where Kant argues that 7  5  12is not analytic, that the concept 12 is not contained in the concept 7, Fichterecognizes that the truths of arithmetic are tied together as parts of a largerconceptual scheme. Fichte goes beyond Kant in showing how profoundlyrelational the world is. It is this method, rather than any mechanical dialectic,that Fichte makes available to other philosophers, the weapon by which somuch territory was suddenly opened for conquest.Fichte does not reject ordinary logic; the principle of contradiction is oneof the devices by which he develops his own system.34 Fichte solves contradictionsby progressively redefining terms which turn out to be contradictory. Thesystematic interrelation of concepts, and their contradictory nature when seenfrom a one-sided viewpoint, is a discovery along the pathway laid out by theKantian search for necessary presuppositions of one’s initial judgments.The process leads to an underlying, necessarily presupposed ground. Fichtedeclares that he has met Jacobi’s challenge, demonstrating that there is somethingbeyond reason, unconditioned by anything else, at the starting point.This identification with the ultimate in Jacobi’s fideism enables Fichte tocapture religion as having been deduced from philosophy. The move makesIdealism not merely a limiter of the claims of religion, as it had been for Kant,but a potential conqueror of religious turf.Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 655Fichte’s absolute self cannot be said to exist in the ordinary sense, for it isthe grounding of existence. Only by rhetoric can it be called a self. It isdiscoverable through one’s limitable, empirical self; but it is more like theAdvaita self-luminous consciousness within which everything is manifested.Nevertheless, Fichte tended increasingly to humanize this self because it coincidedwith a key human quality: freedom.35Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, and their philosophical compatriots were in themidst of the university revolution, successfully expanding the turf of philosophers’careers; they were, for the first time in history, intellectuals takingcontrol of their own base. What they were celebrating above all was theirintellectual freedom. With the characteristic enthusiasm of academics conflatingtheir intellectual conquests with the topics that they are studying, theymade this spirit of freedom into the ground for the universe.Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre is one of the most astounding performances inthe world history of philosophy. Neither previous Idealism nor any otherposition had attempted to deduce why the world exists. Religious idealists hadvacillated between describing the material world as an illusion (as in Shankaraor Berkeley), thereby making its existence a pseudo-problem, or arbitrarilypositing (in the fashion of Plotinus and Ramanuja) that the Highest emanatesthe lower out of its own fullness or play. Nagarjuna’s dialectic had come closeto Fichte in denying any ultimate difference between nirvana and samsara; butthe Buddhists had made no effort to try to derive the world from basicprinciples. Fichte’s uniqueness was not to denigrate the natural world but tobuild it up from philosophical primaries. Fichte is no anti-scientist; he soundslike his contemporary Laplace when he argues that since every part of theuniverse is bound up with the whole, it should be possible “by means ofthought alone, to discover all possible conditions of the universe, both pastand future” (Fichte, [1800] 1965: 7).In a more limited sense, Kant had envisioned philosophy as a scientificdiscipline, complementing the empirical sciences by deductions from the theoreticalside. Fichte and his followers sensed a larger vacuum in intellectualspace, which was simultaneously an opening in the organizational space of theuniversity. Fichte soon became too busy with his proselytizing role, while othersmarked out the fields for conquest: for Schelling, Naturphilosophie, aesthetics,comparative mythology, and religion; for Hegel, history, law, and the social.Just as Fichte made an explicit tool of Kant’s transcendental methods, Hegeldid the same with the dialectic. Fichte and Schelling had proceeded by demonstratingcontradictions within any given determination and within its opposite,then overcoming both by a third determination (Forster, 1993: 159). AsHegel found his place in the intellectual attention space around 1806, he madethe triadic method central to his own work and laid it out for pedagogic pur-656 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsposes in his Logic, the textbook written 1812–1816 during his years as asecondary school teacher. Whereas Fichte’s dialectic kept going backwards,digging more deeply into presuppositions, Hegel’s dialectic goes forward, generatinghistory.The dialectical method can be regarded as a self-conscious crystallizationamong intellectuals of debates which made up their own history. Traditionalconcepts and opposing positions had been subjected to ever more intensescrutiny; rather than destroying a given position, through these debates philosophyhad dug more deeply. Distinctions had been made in concepts previouslytaken as unitary (as Kant had divided the a priori into synthetic andanalytic), and on these grounds in turn whole new realms had been discovered.By the 1790s, the reflexive edge of the philosophical community had becomeaware of the changeableness and multi-sidedness of concepts—not only as anempirical generalization but as a permanent possibility. The dialectic could beused as a method. Philosophy could take control of its own history, deliberatelycreating its next stage.Hegel was the individual in whom this recognition came to consciousness.Located at the center of action in a crowded and highly competitive space, hegot virtually the last attention slot available under the law of small numbers.He found the slot by focusing on history, both of the intellectual communityitself and of its links to the surrounding social world in general. Hegel was thefirst creative philosopher since ancient times who had an explicit sense ofbuilding on the entire chain of predecessors. He came to philosophy from anearlier interest in classical Greek history, which he extended to the less fashionableHellenistic and medieval periods.36 Historical studies were the firstwave of the new academic research disciplines, pioneered by classical archeologistssuch as Winckelmann, a hero of the 1760s, and institutionalized by theGöttingen philologists. Hegel joined a historiographical movement well underway. That movement had already found its ideologist in Herder. But whereasHerder legitimized the particularism of nationalities, Hegel fused history andphilosophy on the level of general principles. He gave history a theory, andthereby opened a wide terrain for the intellectuals of the philosophical facultyto exploit. Not surprisingly, Hegel’s philosophy was routinized in the 1830sand thereafter by a lineage of pupils who became the great scholarly historiansof philosophy.Hegel grounded his most systematic pronouncements on the terrain ofintellectual history. He first announced his originality in the section on Self-Consciousness near the beginning of his Phenomenology of Spirit. He unfoldsthe stages of consciousness emerging through social oppositions, first by thedialectic of master and slave, invoking classical antiquity, then through thestages represented in late antiquity by Stoicism, Skepticism, and finally Chris-Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 657tianity. The last, which Hegel speaks about in an oblique and guarded way asthe “Unhappy Consciousness,” is critiqued in what amounts to a review of themain religious confessions and their respective practices of devotionalism,pietistic moral action, and monastic self-mortification. At the end of the Phenomenology,the Absolute Knowledge which rises above the state, religion, andart is “Philosophical Science as the self-comprehension of Spirit” (Hegel,[1807] 1967: xiii; cf. 805–808). At Berlin, Hegel’s most elaborate and frequentlyrepeated lectures were those on the history of philosophy.For Hegel, metaphysics is historical, and is identical with epistemology.When he first summarizes his system, the terms he uses comment equally wellon the history of philosophy: “Consciousness first finds in self-consciousness. . . its turning-point, where it leaves the parti-coloured show of the sensuousimmediate, passes from the dark void of the transcendent and remote supersensuous,and steps into the spiritual daylight of the present” (Hegel, [1807]1967: 227). This could be a résumé of the world of primitive nature, passingthrough medieval religion, emerging into modernity; it expresses equally acompressed intellectual history from the Enlightenment materialists to theIdealists (with an oblique reference to Schelling, from under whose wing Hegelwas just breaking), and finally to Hegel’s system itself.Hegel sets out by demonstrating that dialectic dissolves the sensory worldof commonsense impressions. Any ordinary object is made up of qualitieswhich distinguish it from other things. But each quality is what it is only inrelation to other qualities that it is not; an apple is what it is by virtue of notbeing an orange. In a rather explicitly Fichtean formula, Hegel comments thatthe identity of A (A  A) depends on the fact that A is opposed to not-A. Theobject dissolves in a sea of relations, not unlike Indra’s net in Hua-yen Buddhism.With the characteristic touch of Idealism, Hegel formulates the qualitiesof objects not as being-for-itself (Ansichsein) but as being-for-another (Andersein).Hegel’s Cartesian starting point, leaving the self to be developed later, isthe Here and Now of sensory immediacy. Here and Now negate all othermoments and elsewheres of being. Although objects and relationships change,Here and Now are constant, universal throughout; the radically particularimplies something universal. What is preserved through the flux of time standsover against every other thing that it has been, as things continuously perishinto something else, as being-for-itself. Being is not univocal, but comes inmodalities: a fundamental distinction is between being something, a determinatebeing (Seiendes), and being-as-such, the undetermined (Sein). Being is thepredicate of every thing, but being as such is not a thing, it is nothing, “pureindeterminateness and vacuity” (Hegel, [1812–1816] 1929: 1:149). This is theposition later revised in existentialist form by Sartre. Hegel uses it to generate658 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe dynamism not only of human beings but of the universe as well. Everyobject in the world is negative, in a state of privation which drives it intoactivity.The dialectic is a frame within which Hegel can theorize every field ofresearch, and thereby implicitly legitimize all of them as food for the philosophicalfaculty. The longest section of Hegel’s Phenomenology, taking upabout 75 percent of the text, is an application of the method to “Free ConcreteMind,” which comprises all the fields of natural science, as well as psychology,human social institutions, politics, law, religion, and art. Hegel’s system encompassesempirical research; observation is a function of Reason, and moreoverLaws which are uncovered in scientific investigation are really existingforces within nature. This is Kant’s theoretical completion of empirical researchin a much more assertive form. Hegel finds particularly apt the study of organicexistence. The unfolding of the plant from seed to bud to blossom can bedescribed as a progression of negations and sublations, flowing from a pregnantpotentiality. He is harsh against downward reductions; Lavater’s physiognomyis critiqued along with the current scientific fad of phrenology as tyingthe inner spirit down to its sensory appearances.One field Hegel eschews: mathematics. Quantity is only an external characteristicof being, whose real essence defies formalization.37 In part this showsa dislike of the mathematical method of proceeding by formally circumscribedaxioms and operations, which ignore the larger interrelation of all conceptsand the process of dialectical reconceptualization by which insight grows.Quantity, Hegel argues, is ultimately qualitative; the law is that quantityeventually reaches points where it passes into qualitative change, as water ata certain temperature turns into ice. Hegel is breaking here not only with Kant,for whom mathematical laws are the essential form of science, but also withvirtually the entire philosophical tradition up to this time, and especially themodernists: Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz.This was not just an idiosyncrasy of Hegel. Since his day philosophers havedivided into those who assimilate philosophy to mathematical logic (the lineagefrom Bolzano and Frege through Russell), and those (in what twentieth-centuryanglophone philosophers somewhat inaccurately call the Continental tradition)who reject mathematics. No doubt Hegel had immediate motivations, especiallyhis rivalry with Fries, a neo-Kantian who criticized the qualitative Naturphilosophiewhile proposing a rival speculative natural history with fancifulmathematical laws.38 To depersonalize the rivalry, Hegel had a good sense forthe moods of academic disciplines, and he might have felt the embarrassmentthat pseudo-mathematics like that of Fries was creating in the eyes of professionalmathematicians. The technical frontiers of mathematics were movingfar beyond the competence of non-specialists. And indeed, although HegelIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 659never gave up his claim that philosophy covers the qualitative fields of Naturphilosophie,this was never a prime interest, for he had uncovered a terrainfar more exploitable by historical-dialectical methods, in the human sciences,which Hegel calls the realm of the Spirit.39Here the dialectic provides theoretical guidance for new realms of observation.The method of showing the one-sidedness of concepts and their dependenceon others, when applied to the ideals of morality and politics, leadsto the recognition that such ideals are always social. The freestanding individualand the moral absolutes of Kant are illusions arising when the viewpointsof particular historical phases take themselves for absolutes. In Hegel’s eyes,Fichte’s touting of freedom was superficial sloganeering. Although Hegel himselfwas an enthusiast of the French Revolution, he could express within hissystem how the attempt to set up an absolute of freedom can lead to despotismand Reign of Terror. Hegel opened up the social sciences as disciplines, andmade dialectical philosophy available as an instrument of social criticism.Already in his Jena period he was arguing that the individual is free only inthe context of property relations; the production of commodities for the marketcan lead to a higher unity only under the regulation of the collectivity embodiedin the constitutional state. Reflecting on the relation between nature andhumanity, Hegel broached themes to be taken up by Marx and Engels: theexternalization of the self through labor, thereby overcoming man’s estrangementfrom the natural world. Hegel kept himself informed about the progressof industrialization and parliamentary reform in England; the English factoryinspectors, agents of the rational state, constituted his image of what socialprogress should look like.40 Economics as an academic discipline in the Germanuniversities was to follow in Hegel’s footsteps: statist, reform-oriented, antimathematical.Hegel reconnoitered the terrain of virtually all the social sciences. Hisinaugural work for the Berlin chair, his Philosophy of Right (1820), wasespecially successful at the time, striking a balance between liberals and conservativesand making good on Kant’s claim that philosophers should exerciseinfluence in the legal faculty as well as every other. His lectures during the1820s, as the academic system settled into place, were devoted to the philosophical(i.e., theoretical) interpretation of the history of the arts, to worldhistory, and to the history of his own discipline.Hegel is like a bright child who has broken into a toy store, enjoying himselfplaying in all the fields of knowledge opened up by the academic revolution.Although he calls it philosophy, it is really the theoretical impulse of theacademic intellectual in a new research field. Once the specialized disciplineswere institutionalized, they would throw off philosophical direction fromabove. Hegel’s philosophy became outdated by the conditions of its ownsuccess.660 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsPolitical Crisis as the Outer Layer of CausalityFrom the stance of the traditional sociology of knowledge, it is tempting toattribute German Idealism to the effects of the French Revolution and Napoleonicwars. If we except Kant’s writings of the 1780s as not yet Idealist, theperiod 1789–1815 coincides nicely with the Idealist efflorescence from Fichte’soptimistic Critique of Revelation in 1792 to Schopenhauer’s resigned Worldas Will and Representation in 1819. The abolition of Christianity in France in1794 contributed to a heady, even apocalyptic atmosphere among the Idealists,who boldly put forth philosophies which earlier would have been punishableas heretical substitutes for religion.The flaw in this explanation is that it fails to explain philosophy in Franceitself. Far from supporting Idealism, the intellectual positions that flourishedduring the Revolution were the opposite of Idealist, religious, and voluntaristicones. Materialism, which had been popular among the radical pre-Revolutionaryphilosophes, received its most extreme expression from Cabanis in 1802;the first statement of biological evolution, by Lamarck in 1809, saw the lightduring the days of freedom from religious dogma; Laplace could declarepublicly that his model of the universe was completely deterministic and thathe had no need for “that hypothesis” of God; and the sardonically atheisticwritings of de Sade were published during 1791–1811.One could try the causality the other way and see Idealism as a Germannationalist reaction against the materialism of the French. But this does notwork for the major German philosophers, most of whom were enthusiasts ofthe French Revolution, at least during the creative upsurge of the 1790s. AfterNapoleon’s conquest of Germany in 1805–1807, Fichte turned nationalist, andindeed lost his life in volunteer hospital service during the liberation wars of1812–1814. Schelling too turned conservative, and old Romantics like FriedrichSchlegel by 1808 had joined the Catholic Church; Schlegel eventuallybecame a state publicist in Metternich’s Austria. But the conservative turnhappened at just the time these thinkers ceased to be creative. Hegel in contrastcontinued to be a fervent supporter of Napoleon all the way to Waterloo andbeyond.Nor did the intellectuals of other states at war with France generally takean Idealist stance. In England, the period saw the dominance of Utilitarianideas (especially Bentham’s publications in the 1790s) that bear no resemblanceto German Idealism. The Romantic poets, Coleridge and later Shelley andKeats, picked up Schelling’s aesthetic nature idealism; these poets tended to bepolitical radicals, not anti-French anglo-patriots. There is no correlation betweeneither proximity or hostility to the French Revolution and Idealistphilosophy.The effects of the Revolution on the content of philosophy were not soIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 661much ideological as structural. It coincided with quite different intellectualactivity in various nations because the material means of intellectual organizationwere different in these places. We return to our three-level model ofcausality: the maneuvering for position within the internal network of Germanintellectuals, which explains the variety of positions taken by individual philosophers;the university reform, which accounts for the common content ofthe Idealist philosophies; and the surrounding political context, which helpsexplain the timing of the philosophical movement. The French Revolution, theGerman defeats in the Napoleonic wars, and the resulting phase of politicalreform within Germany consummated indigenous pressures for university reform,thereby catalyzing the inner networks affecting intellectual creativity.Each level added something to the emotional energies and the contents ofthe ideas put forward by the intellectuals within their network. The FrenchRevolution, Napoleonic conquests, and the wave of domestic reforms whichfollowed in Prussia—the suppression of the ecclesiastical principalities amongthe German Kleinstaaterei, the abolition of serfdom, the establishment of legalequality by abolition of the Estates, the elimination of the aristocratic castesystem in the army and state, even plans (discussed but not put into effect inGermany during 1807–1812) for democratic self-government—all contributedto the themes of freedom and historical movement among the Idealists.41 Theway in which these themes were apportioned among the various philosopherswas determined by the network struggle for attention and the slots availableunder the law of small numbers. We can see why Fichte and Hegel were asuccession, the latter coming to prominence only after the death of the former,both sharing the slot which combined university reform with politicalliberalism. It is in keeping with the pattern of dominant intellectual movementscontrolling an abundance of attention slots that Hegel’s heritage wouldsplit, Right Hegelians taking the purely academic route as historical philosophers,while Left Hegelians continued the ideology of religious and politicalrevolution.The meshing of outer and inner layers helps explain too why Schopenhauer’spessimism and political conservatism, though mixed with genuinelyIdealist ingredients, lost out in competition with Hegel. Schopenhauer wasseeking a turf to distinguish himself from the Fichteans. Since Hegel hadappropriated the dialectic, Schopenhauer downplayed any dialectic of contradictionsand progress toward a higher unity. Although Schopenhauer declaredthat he was returning to the Kantian dichotomous universe, he too waspost-Fichtean in claiming access to the thing-in-itself, recognizable within one’sown self. Fichte had opened the path by identifying the self with will. Schopenhauerdepicted the will as a blind striving, not freedom but a trap. Schopenhauerexposed his teacher’s central concept in a new light, recombining culturalcapital in order to oppose the Fichteans while maintaining his membership in662 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe intellectual movement. History is an endless round of battles going nowhere;the Kantian sphere of ideas is a higher ground, not for scientificallycomprehending the empirical world, but for transcending its change. Againstthe moral religion of Kant, the activism of Fichte, and the constitutionallegalism of Hegel, Schopenhauer propounded a religion of escape. This positioncoincided with the social and political biases of Schopenhauer’s network;his earliest contacts were with conservative French émigré circles, and his originwas in the salon society of the wealthy rather than the Idealist milieu of pastorsand tutors struggling to shape academic career paths. But Schopenhauer wasno typical representative of the conservatives, and his position was creative inprecisely the way it used the concepts of the intellectual core.These outer ideological resonances add something to the explanation of themovement of ideas; but they are carried by vehicles whose technical core isinside the structures of the intellectual community itself. The university revolutionwas the overwhelming impetus because it was a conscious struggle totake control of the immediate conditions of intellectual life.The Spread of the University RevolutionComparisons confirm that it was the university revolution, and concomitantlythe changing position of orthodox theology within the educationalsystem, that produced Idealism, rather than political revolution per se. Forthere were several upsurges of Idealist philosophy outside of Germany whichdid not coincide with similar political upheavals. These Idealist movementswere hardly matters of keeping up with international philosophical fashion,since Idealism had long since fallen into neglect and disrepute in Germany.What they did coincide with was the reform of the English and Americanuniversities along German lines: the adoption of the reform carried out inBerlin in 1810, the transformation of the old medieval college (in America,the center of denominational piety rather than the state church) into theresearch-oriented graduate school, and the upgrading of philosophy into anupper-level subject based on intellectual innovation. British and Americanacademics flocked to Germany for advanced training; what they brought backwas not Idealist philosophy but a version of university structure that had theeffect on philosophy of encouraging the re-creation of Idealism. Modern Idealismwas an intellectual response to internal reforms in the structure of theiruniversity base.Idealist Generations in EnglandThe structure of the English universities was very different from that of theGerman universities before their reform. The medieval higher faculties had longIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 663since decayed; training in law had been monopolized for centuries by the Innsof Court in London, in medicine by independent medical colleges and teachinghospitals. Oxford and Cambridge were dominated by the residential colleges,some of which held extensive property endowments, and whose fellowshipswere valuable sinecures. University professorships existed, but in many casestheir pay was minimal, and there was little demand for their teaching; oftentheir incumbents did not lecture at all, but held them as absentee prebends.Even theology, the only vocational subject for those students for whom theuniversity was more than an upper-class social club, was generally taught in aperfunctory manner. Intellectual standards were low; after 1800 a few collegesgradually instituted honors examinations, but these were optional and confinedto a few classical subjects.42Pressure for reform was bound up with external political movements forwidening the franchise and attacking aristocratic privilege. The universitieswere criticized by the advocates of modern science, of Utilitarian practicality,and of the superior scholarship of the German university model. The issuewhich brought concrete reforms, however, was not intellectual, it was therestriction of university matriculation and of teaching positions to members ofthe Anglican Church, excluding both Protestant Dissenters and Catholics. Theturning point came as the Anglicans broke ranks internally, in heated controversyduring 1830–1860 among warring factions of puritanical Evangelicals,Broad Church liberals, and ritualistic High Church tendencies. The first roundof intellectual fireworks in university philosophy was the result.In 1833, in response to concessions made by the reforming Whig governmentto the Catholic majority in Ireland by redistributing church properties,a movement of Oxford dons arose to defend the autonomous rights of theAnglican Church (Chadwick, 1966; Green, 1969: 59). These so-called Tractariandiscussions of the propertied-cum-spiritual superiority of the churchsoon took on a life of their own. In 1841 John Henry Newman, a defender ofchurch ritualism as an expression of higher spiritual realities within the materialworld, went so far as to provide his own solution to the issue of Anglicanexclusivity by interpreting Anglican tenets as congruent with those of RomanCatholicism. In the ensuing furor Newman was deprived of his fellowship, andin 1845 joined the Catholic Church. The Tractarians were the first livelyevidence of intellectual creativity at Oxford in many generations, presaging theIdealism that was to emerge in the 1870s. In both cases struggle over churchproperty—above all the prebends which materially supported church intellectuals—generated intellectual energy.Although the Tractarians (including those who remained within the AnglicanChurch) were bitter enemies of university reform, they were members ofthe Oxford college—Oriel—which had gone furthest in throwing open its664 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsfellowships to competitive examination, and were themselves notable scholars.Newman was a religiously conservative innovator in philosophy. Arguingagainst both rationalism and sensory empiricism, he held that the modes ofconcrete individual being are subject only to judgments of probability ratherthan logical certainty; one must depend upon an “illative sense” for personallygiving assent to beliefs, equivalent to the pragmatics of action in a world ofconcrete existents (the chief of which, for Newman, is a personal God).Newman represents the first of several cases where pragmatist philosophyemerged as a sophisticated response by religious conservatives to secularizingchallenges.Compromise on the issue of religious tests at the universities eventually ledto secularization, not for lack of strong religious commitments, but becausenone of the theological factions was willing to see the others’ doctrines enshrinedin a formal criterion. Unlike Germany or France, where secularizationwas carried by an anti-clerical state bureaucracy, in England the stalemateamong plural religious factions led to a de facto secularization that none haddesired.A series of reform bills passed by liberal parliaments in 1854–1856 and1872 gradually eliminated religious tests, first for students, then for holders offellowships and professorships. Faculties of law, theology, and arts and scienceswere established in the German style. New professorships were founded andplans made for libraries and scientific laboratories, although funds remainedlargely in the hands of the colleges, and efforts to enforce their contributionto the support of university-level positions were slow to take effect. Althoughthe German model of research-oriented professorships was not precisely duplicated,the English universities opened up an equivalent research base: thecollege fellowships themselves. The large number of colleges offset the existenceof only two major universities and paralleled something of the competitivestructure of the two dozen German universities. With the elimination of religioustests and other restrictions (such as appointments by extra-universitypatrons), fellowships became awards for the highest achievers in the honorsexams. In those areas where there were many college positions, especiallyphilosophy, classics, and history, Oxbridge scholarship quickly blossomed.Alternative university bases began to be established as well. The civicuniversities, most founded after the Oxbridge reforms, were at first generallypoorly funded and had difficulties in attracting students and first-rate faculty.The most prominent of the pre-reform rivals to Oxbridge were UniversityCollege (1827) and King’s College (1831), brought under the degree-grantingumbrella of the University of London (1836); the former of these was dominatedby Utilitarian emphasis on practicality and reform, and an explicitimitation of German secularism. But its initial funds were quickly exhausted,Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 665student numbers fell, and professors’ pay plummeted (Green, 1969: 108–109).Even in the 1860s, the main base of the secular thinkers, Utilitarians andscientific materialists, remained the journalistic marketplace. After the Oxbridgereforms, the attraction of the rival civic universities fell even lower fora time; later they became branches of the career networks of Oxbridge scholars.Although reform was enunciated largely in the name of Utilitarian andscientific ideas, the triumph of university secularization was followed by anoutburst of Idealism (Richter, 1969; Nicholson, 1990). At the network centerwas Balliol College, where Jowett as Greek tutor had been outspoken foruniversity as well as civil service reform and simultaneously for the liberalizationof theology. A turning point was Jowett’s trial and acquittal on heresycharges at Oxford in 1855. Jowett was a Plato scholar, more concerned withupgrading teaching standards in the classics than with encouraging Germanstylephilosophy; nevertheless, his pupil T. H. Green (who arrived the year ofthe heresy trial) became chief tutor at Balliol when Jowett became master in1870, and Idealism was promoted by a series of Green’s students and associates:Bosanquet, Caird, Wallace (translator of Hegel), Bradley (a longtimefellow at Merton College), and many minor followers.The Idealists were strongly attached to educational reform and anti-clericalism,at the same time treating philosophy as a reasoned substitute forreligion. Their attitude resembles that of Hegel, who declared in the 1820s thatreligion henceforward could survive between the extremes of secularism anddogmatism only by taking refuge in philosophy (Dickey, 1993). Green was thefirst Balliol tutor not in religious orders; his friend Sidgwick had resigned hisCambridge fellowship during the height of the controversy on grounds ofconscience as a nonbeliever, and resumed it only under the reformed regulations.43 Idealism as a halfway house to secularization had connections bothways; Green and his compatriots upheld the independence of philosophicaljudgments from all other considerations (political as well as religious), at thesame time claiming for philosophy the prestige of the highest moral activity.Green, Bosanquet, Toynbee, and others of the group were crusaders for socialwork, temperance, and popular education, carrying over the moral impulse ofthe Evangelicals (whose agitation had been principally for strict Sabbath observance)into liberal causes. But the Idealists were not intrinsically a politicalmovement; they included political conservatives such as Bradley (who playedsomething like the part of Schopenhauer or the older Schelling to Green’sFichte).The leading Idealists were all sons of Evangelical clergymen (Richter, 1969);but we cannot explain their positions simply as a psychological reaction,insofar as it is quite as common for sons to follow their fathers’ doctrines asto reject them. The determining situation was structural. Evangelicals were on666 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe opposite fringe from Newman and the Oxford High Church movement;together their mobilization had broken up Anglican domination and led to thesecularization of church-controlled education. These second-generation Evangelicalsinherited leadership as the reform wing within the establishment;taking advantage of the new intellectual situation after the university reforms,they produced not an anti-religion in the manner of the Utilitarians, but aquasi-secularized version of religion.The intellectual opening for the Idealists was initially in disputing theUtilitarian principles brought to the center of attention in the agitation overliberal reform. Green attacked the materialist doctrine of sense data on thegrounds that impressions are never isolated; relations among them can appearonly for a conscious mind. The world must be made by mind, and the apparentexternality of sensory material reality rests on God. Redefining the ideologicalimpetus, Green grounded the ethics of social reform in participation in “higherpurposes,” and argued that the spiritual self-realization of human beings mustbe made in cooperative, altruistic action.Green’s central argument made use of Hume’s critique of causal order inthe associations of sense impressions. Green’s first major scholarly work (1874)was an edition of Hume; the result was to make Hume a canonical figure inmodern academic British philosophy. Once again we see that the most valuablepossessions for creative intellectuals are puzzles which can be used to bringout oppositions to currently dominant positions. Green parallels Kant in theuse that both make of Hume, and Hume’s reputation as a philosopher is largelyowed to these later developments. It is not simply that philosophers’ positionsin intellectual history depend on the accidents of whether they are studied later.The significance of any individual thinker is not created by that person alone.The emergence of certain ideas in the mind and from the pen of an individual,as we have repeatedly seen, is the precipitate of prior and contemporarynetworks and conflicts in the intellectual community. Nor does the socialcausality stop there, for the processes that make a particular individual’sstatements of major or minor significance are above all the roles that theseideas play in future generations of intellectual alliance and opposition. SinceIdealist movements in Germany, England, and elsewhere represent the academizationof philosophy, it is not surprising they should be central in formulatingthe canonical sequences of philosophical history. And of course Idealism is thephilosophy which above all others recognizes the embedding of the individualin larger contexts, and in the historical movement of ideas.Bradley too began by taking Utilitarianism as his foil. His Ethical Studies(1876) held that good cannot be a calculus of pleasures and pains, but involvesduties and ideals; these are social in character, historically changing, and interpretableonly in concrete circumstances rather than in the abstract. Bradley’sIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 667Logic (1883) criticized John Stuart Mill’s inductivism for glossing over theuniversals hidden in its “resemblances” among sensations, and argued thatisolated propositions always rest on unstated assumptions.44 Syllogistic andother formal logics are too narrow; the true subject of logic is always realityas a whole, and our thought at any moment is always an abstraction, incompleteand one-sided. In 1893 these ingredients were built into a full-scalemetaphysical system in Appearance and Reality. Any relation between items isunintelligible without further relations which attach the relation to its relata,and these in turn give rise to an infinite regress of intermediating links. Bothcopula and identity are relations, and their downfall has far-reaching consequences.Causality is an infinite web of conditions, never complete, unintelligiblein its relation to its effects, simultaneously continuous and discontinuous.Substances and their qualities are condemned by this critique; so too space andtime, motion and change, selves and things. All these must be appearancesonly, not reality.Yet error is never total; it too is part of the larger Reality (now capitalized,and referred to as the Absolute). Bradley wields the techniques of skepticismto clear the ground for something positive. There is an ultimate criterion forReality, the non-contradictoriness invoked in Bradley’s previous arguments;and this points the direction in which the Absolute reconciles our difficulties,even if we cannot know just how this is done. Our contradiction-riddledthought is not reality, but our inevitably relational form of thinking implies acompletion beyond itself. Bradley resonates a religious sense of human finitudeand dependence on a larger harmony. The latter part of his system takes onincreasingly the shape of a philosophical if rather heretical religion. Evil isone-sidedness which somehow finds its place in the Absolute; so too mustappearances of bodies and souls. Personal immortality, however, is improbable,and Bradley would rather be free of degrading superstition (Bradley, 1893:448–452). Bradley’s style is beautifully attuned to his message. Its conciseformulations set up crisp paradoxes; its elegant puncturing of opponents andits polite self-deprecation are enfolded in the clarity and symmetry of itsarchitecture; the whole moves to a stately rhythm which assures us ultimatelythat all is well. It is a perfect expression of the Oxford intellectual aristocracyat its height, the philosophical counterpart of the aesthetics of Walter Paterand Oscar Wilde.Bradley illustrates the width of the turf which Idealism had located. Heproceeds via the criterion of non-contradiction, reversing the emphasis ondialectic as used by Hegel and his followers (as in the evolutionary developmentalismof Caird, who was, not surprisingly, a critic of Bradley). Relationswhich Green had taken as evidence of mind in constructing the universeBradley holds to be incoherent. Like all intellectual movements, Idealism pros-668 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathspered by finding sources of internal disputes for generating new variants,together with fresh amalgams of ingredients from other positions.New trends in scholarship were pressed into support of religion; on the onehand, the techniques of the new experimental psychology; on the other hand,the opening to Asian philology and history, such as the translation of Hindutexts (beginning in 1875) by the Oxford professor Max Müller, an import fromGerman philology seminars. This was the heyday of seances and spirit-callings,of Madame Blavatsky (who founded the Theosophical Society in 1875) andAnnie Besant (the Theosophical leader in the 1890s). In 1882 Sidgwick andF. W. H. Meyers, a psychologist and fellow Trinity man, founded the Societyfor Psychical Research, seeking scientific evidence of the survival of bodilydeath.45 Laboratory psychologists also promulgated Idealist metaphysics, includingStout’s Mind and Matter as late as 1931 and his posthumous God andNature (1952).Sub-disputes proliferated as Idealists divided to fill their now-reigning attentionspace. The prominence of Bradley’s impersonal Absolute left a spacefor the defense of theistic or personal Idealism, by James Ward among others.Against the personalists Bradley’s follower Bosanquet defended Absolute Idealismby blending it with the aesthetics and the moralistic do-gooding of theliberal intellectuals; art, science, and religion, he held, are the higher aspectsof Reality which we may touch through our own activities. On the other side,Ward’s Trinity pupil McTaggart reconstructed a Christianity without Christ orredemption, and without a creative or controlling God; the world consists ina community of personal souls, connected by feelings of love. All this takesplace on the level of Absolute Reality, which is beyond time. One consequenceis that souls exist eternally, reappearing through successive births and deaths.McTaggart nevertheless derived his system in a highly technical way, connectingit to the investigations of his colleague Bertrand Russell into the logicalfoundations of mathematics and physics. The key to McTaggart’s system wasformulated in a 1908 paper on the unreality of time. Time consists in twoseries: past-present-future and earlier-later. Only the former involves changeand hence must be the essence of time. But past, present, and future arerelational properties which change and hence must be related to somethingoutside the time series. Equally fatally, the three temporal characteristics ofevents are incompatible, and cannot be made compatible via a concept ofsuccessiveness without begging the question. Time-bound events are appearancesonly, perhaps reflections of a non-temporal ordering.46 Everything culminates,Bradley-like, in a “final” stage which is not temporal, but whichabsorbs all pleasure and pain and gives infinite value to the universe.McTaggart speculates as to the relative maxima, limits, and bounds ofvarious kinds of goods and evils in the series beyond time, in a fashion thatIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 669reminds us of the tools which G. E. Moore had used in his anti-UtilitarianPrincipia Ethica (1903), and of Russell’s innovations in mathematical logic(notably in Principles of Mathematics, 1903). And indeed McTaggart, Moore,and Russell were all intimates, members of the elite discussion society, theApostles, at Trinity, Cambridge. Although Moore and Russell set off a movementof revolt against Idealism, their techniques did not in themselves destroyIdealism, but provided new means by which determined Idealists could openup still further reaches of their own terrain. We see once again that creativityproceeds via simultaneous oppositions, and that the institutional conditionswhich sustain an intellectual attention space are impervious to argument. Notuntil the fading of the generation brought up in the aftermath of the clericalstronghold in the universities was a religious halfway house no longer a majorfocus of attention.Creativity comes from the energy and focus of the networks irrespective oftheir contents. Moore, Russell, and their followers were offshoots of Idealistconnections, in this case of Ward, Stout, and McTaggart; they made theirreputations by repudiating their own youthful Idealism. This anti-Idealistrebellion did not automatically displace the older lineage of cultural capital.Others in these networks continued down through the 1920s to constructsystems which owe much to Idealism. Samuel Alexander, whose ties derivedfrom Green and Bradley and from the experimental psychologists Munsterbergand Stout, repudiated Idealism in the sense of mind as the central constituentof reality. Nevertheless, his system has a quasi-religious quality.47 Alexanderdeveloped a Spinoza-like two-aspect monism; in place of matter and mind, hesubstituted Space (extension) and Time. Drawing on his research in physiologicalpsychology, Alexander (1927: 2:38) argues that mind is an emergent aspectof the spatial ordering of matter: “Time is the mind of Space” (i.e., time is theemergent aspect of extension, the generator of qualities). Such “emergence” ofcourse is on a conceptual level, not itself in time. Further emergents are mind,in the more limited human sense, and at a conceptually “higher” level, Deity.Alexander preserves a place for God, but as derivative of more fundamentalaspects of the universe; philosophy and science are the primary disciplines, butin their dominance they reserve a place for theology.Whitehead’s system, like Alexander’s, resembles Bradley’s religion of theAbsolute, transposed into the terms of naturalism. What for Bradley areparadoxes, marks of the realm of Appearance and goads to move onward tothe Absolute, Whitehead takes as evidence that the underlying concepts aredefective. The result is not to transcend appearance but to derive it from a newconceptual scheme, in which the misleading traditions of language are replacedby conceptions inspired by relativity physics, and by the logical reformulationsdesigned since Dedekind and Cantor to overcome paradoxes in the infinitesimal670 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscalculus and mathematical set theory. Whitehead had come from collaboratingwith Russell on the monumental Principia Mathematica (1910–1913); notsurprisingly, his move back into metaphysics was regarded by Russell asapostasy.48 The very concepts which Bradley had critiqued—substance andattribute, subject and predicate, particular and universal—Whitehead (1929:76–80) declared the source of confusion. He replaced them with a schemeresembling Platonic eternal Ideas and Leibnizian monads, but which Whiteheadcalls the philosophy of organism. There are no atomic elements or particulars;the world is a plurality of “Actual Entities,” analogous to biological cellcomplexes, whose components are inseparable. These are related not throughcausality or other familiar relationships but through “prehension,” an analogueto emotional feelings and appetites on the human level. The connectednessof the universe as a whole has an anthropomorphic character of mutualappetition and satisfaction, which Whitehead refers to as “social”; it is manifestedin a sort of vitalistic self-causation of creative process. Prehensions areconceptual as well as physical; there is an ultimate feeling-connection in logicalpropositions as in the physical universe. God is a derivative notion in thisscheme, but Whitehead finds a place for the traditional religious values andfor a species of immortality. Whitehead regards it as the task of philosophy toconvey how science, morality, and religion all pervade one another; his systemresembles the other products of British Idealism in doing just this.Idealism was creative in England for two generations: the first generationof reform into the research university, and the next generation, when Idealismwas challenged by anti-Idealist philosophies. In both cases the form ofcreativity came from mixtures and oppositions. Just as in the first generationIdealism built upon criticism of the Utilitarian reform ideology, in the followinggeneration the leading systems would take the new cultural capital ofpsychology, mathematics, and physics to continue the Idealist trajectory ofrationalized religion. Idea ingredients can always be combined in various ways;it is the surrounding institutional context that motivates which selections willdominate.Idealism in the United StatesIn the United States, university reform dominated the period 1870–1900 (Vesey,1965; Jencks and Riesman, 1968; Collins, 1979; Geiger, 1993). Hundredsof undergraduate colleges had sprung up in earlier decades, products of sectarianreligious competition and decentralized political jurisdictions. Mostcolleges lacked higher faculties, since during the post-Revolutionary periodof democratization professional training had been de-credentialized into apprenticeshipwith practitioners. There was a lively market for entrepreneursIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 671purveying cultural currency in various forms: the Chatauquas and popularlectures for non-academic audiences without examinations, degrees, or advancedcourses; the colleges; as well as a movement for compulsory state-supportedelementary schools (since the 1830s) and secondary schools (largelybetween 1870 and 1890). There was a good deal of rivalry among these forms,and as yet no clear sequence which led from one to another. Emerson, theleader of the Transcendentalists, disliked schools; his famous call for “self-reliance”was no Nietzschean anti-moralism, but reflected his preference forgoing his own way as a writer and popular lecturer. The Transcendentalistswere products of declining religious orthodoxy; when the Unitarians tookcontrol of Harvard divinity teaching and of the once-establishment CongregationalistChurch in New England in the 1820s, some of the more flamboyantpreachers such as Emerson split off on their own and successfully purveyed amore emotional religion than was provided by rationalistic Unitarianism.On the western frontier, the high proportion of un-churched populationprovided opportunities for new sects of all kinds,49 religious and educationalalike. The St. Louis Hegelian Society, which flourished in the 1860s and 1870s,was one of many culture-seeking adult societies in the fast-growing frontiercities (see Figure 12.2). Its eminence above the others was due to its establishinga wider institutional base (founding the first American philosophical journal,Journal of Speculative Philosophy, which survived from 1867 to 1893), andthe leadership of its members in educational reform. William Torrey Harris,founder of the St. Louis Hegelians, was a school administrator and becameU.S. Commissioner of Education, 1886–1906, using Hegel as a scheme forplanning the topics of the curriculum (Pochmann, 1948: 68–72, 113; Kuklick,1977: 157). Here Idealism was limited to rote schemata, oriented towardpopular audiences and secondary schooling.More original Idealist philosophy was created where the German-stylesecular disciplines and graduate research faculties were introduced into thecolleges. The main loci were the universities which led the reform: Harvard,with its new graduate department in 1872; even more trend-setting, JohnsHopkins (founded 1874) and Chicago (1892) stressed original research andset off a wave of competition to hire eminent professors. In the late 1870sHarvard considered appointing one of the St. Louis Hegelians, Harris orHowison, but the position fell to Royce, a protégé of the founding presidentof Johns Hopkins.50Royce’s Religious Aspect of Philosophy (1885) built systematically from aconsideration of error and doubt. Again an Idealism was constructed on themoves of Descartes and Hume, seen through the lens of Kantian uncoveringof presuppositions. The intentionality of picking out objects implies that onepossesses pre-cognitive knowledge of them. Even doubting something implies672 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFIGURE 12.2. NETWORK OF AMERICAN PHILOSOPHERS,1800–1935: GERMAN IMPORTS, IDEALISTS, PRAGMATISTSIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 673an apprehension of it in some measure. If one doubts one’s power to transcendthe moment, one has already transcended the moment; indeed, “this moment”has meaning only in opposition to other moments, and implies a universalwithin which one is enmeshed. This pre-cognitive apprehension can be achievedonly by a self; for error to exist, there must be a disjunction between this deeperself and our momentary consciousness. So far, then, there must be a pluralityof selves which make up the universe. But if there are many, there must berelations among them, and these relations in turn can be objects for true orfalse thoughts; and these again point to an all-inclusive Self which constitutestheir meaning.Once the university reform had produced Idealism as a halfway housebetween religion and secularism, further mixtures with surrounding intellectualmovements became possible. As in Germany and England, it was these mixturesthat made the next generation a creative one as well. Royce’s Idealisminfluenced his Harvard colleagues for several decades. Chief among them wasWilliam James. In 1870, at the beginning of his career as a medical scientist,James had a personal breakdown, connected to the strains between his religiousfaith—his father, Henry James, Sr., was a prominent Swedenborgian spiritualist—and the enthusiasm for Darwinian naturalism among his young scientificfriends. The conjunction of spiritual and scientific issues led him from physiologicalto psychological research in 1875, and thence to a junior positionhoused in the philosophy department. Soon thereafter James encounteredRoyce, whose Idealism came as a resolution to his own religious difficulties. Itparticularly meshed with James’s activist psychology in the doctrine that judgmentsare intentional, picking out and actively meaning their objects (Kuklick,1972: 37–40). James became a Roycean pantheist until the 1890s; when Roycestressed the Absolute aspect of his philosophy, James began to criticize whathe called the “block universe” philosophies.To make a place for free will, James developed his pragmatist doctrine:truth, lacking any objective referent, can only mean the consequences of beliefsas forms of action. The truth he wished to defend, as he made clear in TheWill to Believe (1897), was that of religion, which is justified by its sociallybeneficial consequences. This was followed up in 1902 by Varieties of ReligiousExperience, which musters empirical evidence on mysticism, bolstering thereality of religion from yet another angle. These were James’s first majorpublications outside of experimental psychology (where he had made hisreputation with his synthesizing Principles of Psychology in 1890). Now thatJames had his own epistemology, he switched his chair back from psychologyto philosophy,51 and met Royce on his own turf with Pragmatism in 1907.Royce and James developed their positions in friendly controversy over theyears, Royce moving closer to Christian theism, partially incorporating James’s674 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathspragmatism but also limiting it so as not to jeopardize the objective truthguaranteed by the Absolute. On his side, James found his way to pragmatismvia Royce.Pragmatism was the product of interaction between religious Idealism andthe research sciences fostered by American university reform. Peirce emergedfrom the same circle as James at Cambridge in the 1860s and early 1870s.Both were early graduates of the Lawrence Scientific School just established atHarvard; both grew up surrounded by the Transcendentalist elite of the earliergeneration and by the militant Darwinists of the new one. James’s familyconnections were more on the religious side, Peirce’s on the side of science andmathematics. His father, Benjamin Peirce, was the leading American astronomerand mathematician of midcentury, and a prime mover in introducingscience into the Harvard curriculum (Brent, 1993: 31). Charles Peirce’s positionswere primarily in research institutions, the Harvard Observatory, and(during 1861–1891) the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, which his father hadheaded. His only academic post was in the mathematics department at JohnsHopkins (1879–1884); this was cut short by the animosity of respectablyreligious academics, who also blackballed Peirce from positions at Harvardand Chicago.Charles Peirce must have personified every danger the academic establishmentfeared from reform. He was a scientist, arrogant and disrespectful oftraditional propriety. To make matters worse, Peirce was a spoiled child of theNew England elite trying to keep up with the status claims of the Gilded Age.He lived beyond his means and was irresponsible with research funds; he cuta figure as a dandy in Paris and New York, divorcing his Boston wife andliving with a fashionable Frenchwoman. His later life deteriorated into a seriesof unsuccessful moneymaking schemes and mounting debts, which reducedhim to poverty. Why should such a man have entered philosophy at all? Thiswas the core discipline of the barely reformed religious colleges, where prejudicesagainst Peirce would have been at their highest. He entered the lions’ denas the protégé of his father, a mathematical Platonist at home in the olderreligious-academic milieu. Peirce found in Idealism the turf on which to develophis unique contribution, his theory of signs, situated at the overlap of mathematicsand the logic of the philosophical curriculum.Both Peirces were much more pathbreaking in mathematics than in researchscience. The older Peirce was known for solid but essentially derivative accomplishmentsin astronomy, following up others’ discoveries in the 1840s and1850s of the planet Neptune and of Saturn’s rings. Charles Peirce’s years oflaboratory work made him a respected but minor scientist, best known forimprovements in instrumentation for the measurement of gravity. In puremathematics both Peirces were more original but still could not crack the firstIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 675level of international leadership. Their work generally lost out in priority toDe Morgan, Cantor, Dedekind and others. Charles’s mathematics was sometimeserroneous, and not well received by cutting-edge algebraists such asSylvester, his Hopkins department chief (EP, 1967: 6:76; DSB, 1981: 10:483–486). Peirce settled on logic as his preferred path to success because this waswhere his early resources best panned out. On European trips in 1870 and1875, armed with introductions from his father, he met Boole, Jevons, andClifford, and impressed them with his developments of mathematical logic, anew field in which his work was most clearly original.Peirce’s semiotic originated in the intersection of Idealism and mathematics(Murphey, 1961; Eisele, 1979; Brent, 1993). Peirce began in the 1860s as aKantian and Platonic Idealist, a mixture typical of the Transcendentalists whofrequented his father’s house. He began with a triad of ontological categories:(a) abstract Ideas in (b) the mind of God, plus (c) the sensory world whichappears as matter. What was original was that Peirce reformulated ontologythrough the lens of the logical propositions: matter, mind, and Ideas areequivalent to subjects, predicates, plus the intervening connection via an “interpretant”mind. Put another way, the copula is a sign relation, and the mindis nothing more than the user of signs. Peirce absorbed metaphysics into logic,producing his own semiotic Idealism.Like the other Idealists, Peirce attacked the empiricist philosophy whichderives knowledge from the association of ideas with sensory objects. WhereasGreen argued that the mind provides relations not given in sensation, Peircepointed to the missing ingredient as the sign intervening between object andmind (or “interpretant”). Signs are never isolated atoms, but part of infiniteseries of signs flowing off in several dimensions; the interpretant is itself a sign,and so is every part of a subject-predicate expression. The connectedness ofmeanings with one another had been a stock-in-trade of the Idealists sinceHegel, and Idealist arguments through the turn of the century pointed to thecultural realms of art and science as evidence of a spiritual reality transcendingthe individual. Peirce, who had worked in Agassiz’s laboratory classifyingbiological specimens, taxonomized his newly discovered array of semioticforms into a vast Linnaean project that he expected would give rise to a scienceof all the sciences.A Kant-like architectonic of categories appealed to Peirce because he recognizedthis as territory on which new discoveries could be made. Contemporarymathematics pointed the direction. In 1843 William Rowan Hamilton(not to be confused with the philosopher Sir William Hamilton) had createdquaternions, an alternative algebra without the commutative law of multiplication.In the 1860s Benjamin Peirce had moved into this area; at the urgingof his son, he developed a linear associative algebra which generalizes the676 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsmethod of quaternions to inventing multiple algebras and investigating theirproperties. Modern higher mathematics was just becoming conscious thatsymbol systems need not be taken for granted as neutral tools of the trade;results of this awareness included not only quaternions but also the non-Euclideangeometries discovered in the 1820s and systematized by Riemann in 1854.New symbol systems could be posited and new realms of discovery opened upby examining their consequences.52 Young Peirce had an even grander vision:mathematics is the key to all symbol systems and therefore all knowledge; themethod of positing symbols and exploring their consequences is the very stuffof the universe.In the 1880s Peirce developed his combination of higher mathematics andIdealism into an evolutionary cosmology. Because he identified the working oflogic in the mind with reality itself, Peirce anthropomorphized the universe.Borrowing a concept from the new experimental psychology, he argued thatthe unconscious habits from one sign to another, which constitute inference,exist throughout reality. Nature is an endless string of signs, each pointingbeyond itself: “Even plants make their living . . . by uttering signs.” There isnothing beyond signs: “Reals are signs. To try to peel off signs and get downto the real thing is like trying to peel an onion and get down to [the] onionitself.” Peirce called his position “synechism,” the doctrine that the externalreferent of any true proposition is a real continuum in the mathematical sense,“something whose possibilities of determination no multitude of individualscan exhaust.” The same holds in epistemology and in ontology: “Our knowledgeis never absolute but always swims, as it were, in a continuum ofuncertainty and of indeterminacy. Now the doctrine of continuity is that allthings swim in continua.”53 The technical basis comes from Cantor’s work onhigher orders of infinite sets, which Peirce followed up during his years in theHopkins mathematics department. Pushing mathematics onto the terrain ofphilosophy, Peirce posited a collection beyond all trans-finite sets, an ultimateground of reality in which there is nothing discrete and everything is weldedinto a continuum. There are no isolated sense impressions nor any logicalparticulars; only universals are real.By the 1890s, as Peirce’s career was cut adrift from scientific institutions,his philosophy increasingly took the form of a scientific-religious system fromwhich he planned to make a fortune in mass-marketed promotions. Thesebusiness ventures came to nothing, but Peirce sketched out his principles ofpopularized Idealism in the guise of evolution as a principle of self-sacrificinglove, manifested in periodic laws of history analogous to those of chemistry.Alternatively, scientific laws themselves are the result of evolution. Matter is“effete mind.” The universe is evolving from “a chaos of unpersonalizedfeeling,” in which chance plays a decreasingly lesser part as habits emergeIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 677“until the world becomes an absolutely perfect, rational and symmetrical system,in which mind is at last crystallized in the infinitely distant future.”54Peirce’s evolutionist cosmology had a good deal in common with others of thetime, especially Spencer’s, which Peirce criticized for its materialism and lackof logical sophistication. Royce recognized the affinity between Peirce’s systemand his own, and was one of the few motivated to master Peirce’s semiotic,which he incorporated into his late system, The Problem of Christianity(1913).Peirce’s blend of higher mathematics with Idealism and his totally newsemiotics made his position extremely difficult for his contemporaries to grasp.His technical logic was obscured by popular philosophy, his semiotics bypsychology, cutting him off from recognition by the practitioners of the specializeddisciplines who alone were capable of following him. Peirce’s recognitioncame late in life, in connection not with his Idealist system but withpragmatism. James had announced the doctrine in 1898, and by 1907 it hadtaken on the proportions of a popular movement (Myers, 1986: 299; Brent,1993: 297). Peirce’s generous supporter during these days of poverty, Jamesmade a point of giving Peirce credit for originating the doctrine. In 1905 Peirceentered the public eye by writing explicitly about his own version, which henow called pragmaticism.Peirce’s papers of 1877–78 had described the meaning of a concept as itsobservable consequences under various conditions of experiment. Truth isthat which the larger community of scientists settles on in the long run, thoseitems of belief which work so well that they become habitually fixed in thechain of signs. But Peirce had not used any term like “pragmatism,” nor placedmuch emphasis on this as an epistemology; indeed, he was aware that hisargument did not guarantee that the scientific community would always converge.Peirce’s pragmatism was a retrospective construct, a strand selected fromthe tangled skein of his earlier projects. When James made pragmatism famousin the late 1890s, it was as a defense of religious belief. Peirce, who was alwaysa deep-rooted Idealist, needed no pragmatism for this purpose. What Jameswas doing was an entirely different project; he was pulling himself free fromhis Idealist allies such as Royce, and developing an alternative philosophywhich could make Christianity compatible with science without embracing anIdealist system. If Idealism was a halfway house between secularism andreligion, pragmatism was a halfway house to the halfway house.55The context in which Peirce developed his own pragmatist strands wasentirely different. His main tool was importing cutting-edge mathematicalmethods into logic. Following De Morgan’s logic of relations, Peirce wasdeveloping the view that an object is defined not by its qualities but by itsrelations with other objects—its “behavior,” so to speak, under various experi-678 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsmentally or mathematically defined conditions. Another strand in Peirce’sthinking was a staple of academic philosophy in American religious collegesat midcentury: the critique of Humean doubt by the Scottish “common-sense”philosophy (Reid, Stewart), which had argued for the validity of ordinary faithin both the order of sensible nature and the existence of God. With hismathematical tools, Peirce was able to mount a more penetrating critique, bothof sensationist induction and of rationalistic doubt.56 Peirce in his later yearscalled his position “critical common-sensism,” as if to imply a blend of Kantand the Scottish philosophy. Peirce held that “all uncriticizable beliefs arevague, and cannot be rendered precise without evoking doubt” (Brent, 1993:300). There is no such thing as a first sensation, for an object takes shape onlyafter it has been subjected to interpretations via the chain of signs. By the sametoken, there is no final cognition because the reinterpretations can go onendlessly as further sign connections are made and the object thus evoked isseen in its further ramifications. And since the “object” itself is only a postulate,a sign hypothesized in order that its consequences might be investigated, thereis neither clear-cut doubt nor clear-cut elements of reality. Vagueness is aninherent property of the universe, out of which definite concepts and laws canonly evolve.Pragmatism in the hands of Peirce was just the sort of Idealist block-universethat James had created his own pragmatism to replace. Peirce allowedhimself to be attached retrospectively to the pragmatist movement, grasping ata few straws of fame amid his general failure. But even in his embattled oldage, Peirce touted his own “pragmaticism [as] closely allied with Hegelianabsolute idealism,” and claimed that dialectic is a special case of his own triadicmetaphysics (Brent, 1993: 299). Peirce’s socially oriented pragmatism of thecommunity of researchers resonates with the naturalistic philosophy and sociologyof science that developed two generations after his death, but onlybecause the Idealism that was Peirce’s own intellectual milieu was dead andforgotten. The naturalistic side of Peirce was developed only in the mid- andlate-twentieth century, after the social and semiotic sciences had expanded; heis a major philosopher retrospectively because the social conditions whichdetermined his discoveries were long-term ones, ultimately giving rise to theseindependent disciplines. In his day Peirce struggled for recognition, and wasovershadowed by much more clear-cut Idealists such as Royce, and on theother side by pragmatists such as James and Dewey. The chaos of Peirce’s careeris paralleled by the chaotic nature of his writings: a mass of scattered papersand voluminous disorderly drafts for a system which was never published. Ourretrospective Peirce the semiotician is a cleaned-up version for modern tastes.The moment when the American university system was differentiating createdan opening for the combination of mathematics, philosophy, and religion,Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 679which were the ingredients of Peirce’s system; he was a figure of the transition,who guessed wrong as to the future base for omni-comprehensive systems ofhis sort. Nor is it just a matter of Peirce’s having come too soon. He wasintrinsically a thinker of the late Idealist generation, and he would have beendisappointed by the merely naturalistic specialty of semiotics in which his workfinally found a niche. The trajectory of academic change explains Peirce’sfailure in his own lifetime, and the wavering and unfocused quality of hisintellectual energies.57Even in Europe mathematical logic existed precariously at the margins ofrecognized disciplines; in America, where the bases for scientific research andteaching were just being created, Peirce’s best work went largely unperceivedby his colleagues. Peirce was arrogant because he saw himself as a genius (arole for which his father had groomed him); he could see the ramifications ofhis new science of signs early on, but the whole project was invisible to mostothers. In light of his modest achievements in conventional fields, his claimssounded like those of a pretender and a charlatan. Peirce’s neuralgia andpersonal irresponsibility may have multiplied his structural disadvantages, buta soberer and healthier person probably would still have failed to achieverecognition. The examples of Frege and, in an earlier generation, Bolzano showthat the path to institutionalizing the field of mathematical logic was extremelyrocky; both of these trailblazers were honored only retrospectively by a latergeneration of philosophers. Georg Cantor, who was Peirce’s closest counterpartin developing (from 1874) the extreme implications of transfinite set theory,and who also argued that the continuum justifies the existence of God, wasthe object of controversy and even contempt in the German mathematicalcommunity. The strain caused Cantor a series of breakdowns from 1884 untilhis death in a mental hospital in 1918 (Dauben, 1979; Collins and Restivo,1983). We will consider the social development of mathematical logic inChapter 13.Experimental Psychology and the Pragmatist MovementA cleaner transition from religious Idealism to pragmatism is exemplified inthe career of Dewey. Unlike the scientist-hybrids James and Peirce, Dewey wasan offshoot of theological connections and the core curriculum of the oldreligious colleges. He began with the intention of becoming a Congregationalistminister, and taught Bible classes until well into his 30s (Kuklick, 1985:230–241). His teachers, liberal theologians from Andover and Union seminaries,were receptive to popular Hegelianism as a way of reconciling religion withDarwinian evolutionism. At Johns Hopkins in the early 1880s, Morris introducedDewey to the technical philosophy of T. H. Green.58 From the point of680 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsview of liberal theology, Green’s flaw was his static dichotomy of the spiritualworld between individual selves and the absolute Self, precluding the evolutionof the former into the latter. At Hopkins, Dewey encountered an ingredient forovercoming this problem, the experimental psychology introduced by G. StanleyHall. The theological issue could be approached by scientific research; andthis, Dewey concluded, showed the human mind to be a teleological activityof the living organism, whose trajectory points to the divine.So far Dewey was just another theological liberal with an affinity forHegelianized evolutionism. He found a more distinctive slot in legitimating theburgeoning research disciplines of the reformed university. Philosophy departmentswere establishing psychology laboratories, in which a branch of the oldmetaphysical terrain was made into an empirical study. Dewey propagandizedfor the significance of experimental psychology; it was an Ur-science (Kuklick,1985: 239), foundational to other disciplines, since psychology is the point atwhich the absolute manifests itself in the world. From an Idealist viewpoint,the connection of psychology with the physiological organism was a gatewayfor attaching spirituality to the physical and biological sciences as well.59At Michigan (1884–1894), Chicago (1894–1904), and Columbia (1905–1952), Dewey encouraged what would become some of the leading psychologylabs. Under Angell at Chicago and Thorndike at Columbia, researchers weremoving away from introspective-mentalistic studies in the style of Wundt andtoward behavioral research. Recruitment to psychology was burgeoning, andtension was growing between the new-style researchers and traditional philosophers.By 1912, psychologists had an independent professional associationand separate psychology departments in a dozen universities.60 Militant behaviorism,which Watson announced in 1913, became the ideology for maximallyseparating psychology from philosophical content. Dewey himself never madethe break, but during these years the experimental method displaced Idealismas his principal philosophical commitment. In the 1890s, Dewey called psychologicalresearch “experimental Idealism” (Kuklick, 1985: 239); by the early1900s he was regarding it as the basis of “instrumentalism.”Having disposed of formal logic, and of the gaps between finite and infinite,between the human and natural worlds and the Absolute, Dewey no longerneeded Idealism. Science exemplified the biological propensity of the organismto adjust to circumstances in order to survive. The scientific method of repeatedongoing experiments, with new goals and values emerging from every step,became the method applicable to all his concerns. Dewey grew less religious,more oriented toward good works in the movement for settlement houses,labor rights, and public education. The Idealist worldview of spiritual communitywas naturalized as the democratic cooperation of human society, anddemocracy was made the equivalent of the religious ideal; both were equatedIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 681with scientific experimentation evolving toward solving problems. Dewey’sreputation faded in the long run; in his day he was the most publicly prominentAmerican philosopher, above all by legitimating scientific research and educationthrough connecting it with the core political ideology.The pragmatism of George Herbert Mead came from a background closeto Dewey’s (Miller, 1973; Joas, 1985). Mead’s milieu was that of Protestantmissionaries; his father was a theology professor, his mother a pious collegepresident. Mead was inducted into intellectual networks as a tutor in James’sfamily, as a student of Royce, and, while sojourning in Germany, of Wundt.Finally, he was a loyal protégé of Dewey, who brought him to Chicago in 1894,where they participated together in the Social Gospel movement. Like otherAmericans of his generation seeking to mitigate parental religious strictness,he became attracted to experimental psychology as the amalgam of science andspirituality. But psychology was secularizing, and Mead was exposed to itsmilitant side by his friendship with the behaviorist John B. Watson (a graduatestudent at Chicago, 1900–1903). Against this tide, Mead preserved Idealistthemes of the sociality and connectedness of mind by transforming them intoa naturalistic social psychology.In Mead’s system, mind emerges from the social interaction of humananimals. Words are verbal gestures whose significance is the intended actionthey convey to their hearers; understanding a language is made possible bytaking the role of the other person. Universals do not exist in the world, butare produced by symbols, by virtue of meaning the same thing for everyone.It is the Generalized Other—the open-ended capacity of humans to take thepoint of view of anyone at all—which constitutes a world of permanent objectsfor the individual mind. Thinking is internalized conversation, the humananimal’s interchange of gestures carried out by splitting oneself into speakerand hearer. The upshot of Mead’s philosophy is that mind is no longer mysterious;it is an empirical process whose variations are explainable by themethods of sociological research.Mead’s theory of mind was little recognized among philosophers. It was inthe 1930s, after his death, that sociologists at Chicago made Mead famous intheir own discipline as the founder of what they called symbolic interactionism.Mead resembles Peirce in leaving scattered unfinished manuscripts (notablyMead, 1938) but publishing little major work in his lifetime; his blockage ofcreative confidence is related to his ambivalent position in the intellectual field.Mead himself was never wholeheartedly a naturalistic sociologist; he retaineda commitment to Idealism to the end. In lectures given in 1930 he describestime as a construct of human projects, and past history as constantly reshapedby the emergent concerns of the present. Objects are constituted as discreteunits and definite forms only as these become the focus of action upon them;682 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe solidity of physical objects exists for us because we project ourselves intothem—we take the role of the physical object—and imagine ourselves pushingback (Mead, 1938: 426–432). Lest this make the world too human-centric,Mead suggests that perspectives exist objectively in the sociality of nature, asplanets, molecules, and the like constitute one another by their interaction(Mead, 1932: 47–66, 162–174). It is as if Mead had solved the Berkeleyanproblem of “esse est percipi” by attributing the qualities of a mind to everythingin nature, and identifying mind with the sharing of perspectives in socialaction.Even in their heyday, the pragmatists did not dominate American philosophy.By the 1920s, Dewey was famous, but largely in connection with progressiveeducation, his application of pragmatism to the reform of the secondaryschool curriculum, overturning the classical subjects in favor of life adjustment.His bastion was not the philosophy departments but the university departmentsof teacher training, which had grown up to coordinate the university revolutionwith the burgeoning public high school system. In philosophy itself, Idealismremained the dominant position down to the 1930s. Pragmatism was regardedby professional philosophers as epistemologically unserious in its relativismand human-centrism and inferior to the objectivity of Idealism (Schneider,1963: 509–510). Personal Idealists continued to defend the individuality ofsouls and the personhood of God. In the 1910s, James’s students, led bySantayana and Perry, abandoned pragmatism for New Realism, which fittedcomfortably into naturalistic secularism but also reduced the leverage andprestige of a distinctively philosophical vantage point. The next big wave inphilosophy, the analytical-logicist style introduced in the 1930s, was to sweepall this away with uncompromising militancy. As in England, Idealism and itshybrids dominated American philosophy during the two generations of theintroduction of the German-style research university. When full-scale religioussecularization of higher education was complete, Idealism was rejected.Idealism in Italy, Scandinavia, and JapanIn Italy too Idealism arose in connection with the struggle for secularizingeducational reform. The papacy had opposed national unification as a threatto its territorial possessions and privileges in the conservative states. From theperiod of political unification (1859–1870), nationalists were anti-clericals,fighting to wrest education from the church by constructing a centralizedschool system, modeled on the German educational laws (Barbagli, 1982). Italyhad a large number of independent universities, the result of long-standingpolitical divisions and of the spate of foundings throughout the Middle Ages.Before national unification, the universities still taught scholasticism. AfterIntellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 683unification, universities were incorporated into the centralized state system,and the German model of higher research faculties was imposed on them. Inthe secularized regions of the north, the universities quickly became integratedinto international networks of science; positivism was strong, and the leadingphilosophers were hybrid mathematician-logicians such as Peano and his pupilVailati.Since priests had been a large proportion of schoolteachers, staffing thesecularized system, especially in the south, was a long struggle over the degreeof accommodation necessary with the church. The philosophers of ItalianIdealism were a network in the south. Standing between the camps, the movementpromoted education as a new spirituality shorn of otherworldly transcendence,while opposing as well the positivism and materialism of the northernliberals. The founder was Spaventa, an old Naples revolutionist, who returnedfrom exile in the 1860s and formulated a pan-Italian intellectual allianceusing Hegelian Idealism as a vehicle. The famous Idealists were Spaventa’spupils and grandpupils: Labriola, Gentile, and Croce (who was also Spaventa’snephew).The Idealist group came together in the 1890s, discussing Marxism in ajournal funded by Croce. The Italian labor movement was becoming organized;Labriola made contact with the leftist network by corresponding with FriedrichEngels and Georges Sorel. Labriola’s Marxism downplayed the laws of historicalsequence as inapplicable to the peculiar political circumstances of Italy,instead making a place for national consciousness. Italian Idealism emerged asMarxism shorn of its materialism, oriented toward social struggle and disavowingtranscendence of historical process—in short, Marxism turned backto its Hegelian roots. Croce, who had begun as an antiquarian researcher, nowdeclared history the master discipline. Neither religion nor science can transcendhistory; all thought is contained in particular historical circumstances.And history is action and strife; judgments are only pauses to assess obstaclesto action. If one withdrew from action, there would be no thought. History isno positivist science of fact gathering; since the past is dead, all that can berecovered is its spirit. Gentile’s Actual Idealism, promulgated in 1916, takes toan extreme the identification of reality with action and the denial of anytranscendent values. Mind is the only reality; there is no separation of thoughtfrom an external world nor separation of thought from practice. “The true iswhat is in the making” (Gentile, [1916] 1922: 10); there is no outside criterionby which to judge.Labriola had sought a compromise in educational reform: independence ofschools from the church, but with respect for the inner spirit of religioussentiment (Kolakowski, 1978: 2:185). Gentile polemicized against modernistsover the curriculum, and favored religious instruction in elementary schools.684 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsCroce became minister of education in 1920–21, and Gentile succeeded himin 1922–1924 under Mussolini. In Italy the halfway house of Idealism correspondedall too well with a Fascist regime imposing an authoritarian synthesisbetween clerical conservatives and the secularizing left. As external circumstancesstagnated, Idealism too hung on longer in Italy than elsewhere.In Scandinavian philosophy, the timing of Idealism was earlier because thereforms were carried through earlier. In the Swedish universities, Idealismaccompanied reforms paralleling the German reforms: under the constitutionalmonarchy of 1809, government offices formerly monopolized by the highernobility were opened to “qualified” applicants through university examinations.The prestige of theology chairs, once the apex of academic careers, nowdeclined, replaced by philosophical studies, which became high-status Bildung.Kantianism became prominent in the early 1800s, Hegelianism from the 1830sand 1840s, along with Boström’s indigenous Swedish version of spiritualistIdealism (EP, 1967: 7:295–301; Liedman, 1993). In 1852 the Humboldtianelevation of research above teaching was officially decreed. The end of Idealistdomination came with another wave of reform in 1902; the required generalcurriculum in philosophy was downgraded to the secondary school level andreplaced by professional specializations. This reform was rapidly followed inphilosophy by a movement, beginning in 1910 and continuing into the 1930s,militantly rejecting subjectivism and spiritualism. The Uppsala philosophy ofHägerstrom and Phalén reduced moral sentences to empirical statements plusemotions and commands, in a fashion anticipating the logical positivists.Similarly in Finland, after a century of Idealism, philosophy turned to logicalpositivism. These cases add to the list of anti-metaphysical movements inuniversity systems after Idealist domination ended.The Japanese sequence paralleled the European secularization struggles.The contents of traditional religion and the political ideologies of the modernizersare peculiar to Japan, but the institutional and intellectual dynamics aremuch the same. The Japanese universities set up in the 1870s through the 1890swere directly modeled on the German—as indeed was the case with the English,American, Italian, and Scandinavian reforms. The early Meiji generation ofWesternizing pioneers emulated Utilitarianism and materialist science; but assoon as the universities achieved autonomy under Japanese teachers, philosophyquickly turned to an indigenous version of Idealism led by the Kyotoschool. The halfway house in this case was of course not between secularismand Christianity, but between the militants of the newly secularized schoolsystem and Buddhism. In the early period of reform, Buddhists were subjectedto atrocities just like Catholics at the hands of European anti-clericals. TheBuddhist religion could not be so easily displaced, just as in Italy the Catholicteachers could not be so rapidly dispensed with. In the already widespread pri-Intellectuals Take Control: The University Revolution • 685vate education of the Tokugawa period, a considerable proportion of teachersin the lower schools were Buddhist priests. Anti-clericalism soon passed as themodernizing regime made de facto accommodation with Buddhist education.The Shinto cult promoted at the national level was too particularistic andtoo artificial a construction to serve as a rationalized philosophy; on the otherside, Neo-Confucianism, dominant in the elite schools during the Tokugawa,was already substantially secularized. Buddhist philosophy made an unexpectedcomeback because it could most easily take the form of a religion ofreason. Nishida and the Kyoto school paid respect to tradition but relied noton dogma and faith but on articulate argument. Precisely because the institutionalreformers had tested the imports available from world philosophy, thenetwork of leading Japanese intellectuals soon recognized that in Buddhistmaterials they had available a rationalized religious philosophy that could holdits own with any in the cosmopolitan world. Even this pattern is not sodistinctive to Japan; for each of the reforming educational systems—in America,Italy, and England—was also an international import. The intellectuals ineach of these networks too were cosmopolitans reaching out from within theirown school system in an attempt to loosen the hold of particularistic religiousdoctrine. Idealism is cosmopolitanism in religion; it is religious thought arguedout independently of dogma and tradition, yet keeping a place in its systemfor a reasoned loyalty to transcendence and tradition. That is why Idealismeverywhere is the favored philosophy in the transitional generation of secularizingreformers.The Secularist Repudiation of IdealismThere was a revolt against Idealism in virtually every national academic systemin the generation after university reform was complete. Secularization almosteverywhere eventually won a complete victory within the academic world.Where this happened, the claims of religious specialists were reduced to thoseof one specialty on a par with any other. After the older generation died out,even a sentimental respect for religious tradition no longer had much influence.The younger generation of intellectuals, unconcerned about the sensibilities oftheir academic grandparents, took as their topic the weaknesses presented bythe Idealist halfway house. The Germans, who first underwent the Idealistrevolution, were the first to repudiate it. After Hegel’s death came Feuerbachand Marx, Helmholtz and Büchner. In England, Bradley and Bosanquet becametargets for Moore and Russell. In America, Royce and the religious-pragmatistJames were superseded by C. I. Lewis, Stevenson, and Quine.Nevertheless, philosophy everywhere flows in channels initially cut by theIdealist revolution. Although flamboyant Idealism has been repudiated, phi-686 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathslosophy has not gone back to the style of thinking of the lay figures of theEnlightenment or of the Utilitarians. Academic philosophers are now irreparablytechnical; and even in internecine polemics, when they deride “philosophy”and call for its death, they continue to hold the turf colonized by theinitial German Idealists.Virtually all academic philosophers in the reformed systems since about1800 have been post-Kantians. They all do “critical” philosophy, taking forgranted that ontological claims must pass through an epistemological filter; allsearch for what there is in the mind, or seek to depersonalize it further, in thesemiotic process, which shapes the nature of what is taken to be knowledge.Kant taught philosophers to use the technique of asking what it is that mustnecessarily be presumed for an argument to be made at all. Virtually allsubsequent philosophy might be described as “transcendental” in the strictsense, however much later philosophers might despise the terminology.It is no surprise that after the downfall of ambitious Idealist metaphysicsthere should occur the revival movement of Neo-Kantianism. The philosophicaltools forged in the original academic revolution still mark out the turf ofacademic philosophy. The effort to delimit and then to take over the territoryof theology has been outdated. What remains are the techniques initially usedfor that battle. Philosophers learned that the most widely applicable weaponsin argument are those which probe the ground beneath the argumentativeweapons of all other specialists. Philosophy claims the most general right ofthe autonomous intellectual community to carry on its arguments, and to judgethe validity of everything else. This makes the same claim in intellectual termsthat the academic revolution did organizationally: the autonomy of intellectualsto run their own affairs, and to bring all the world under the scope of theirjudgment.