CHAPTER 13£The Post-revolutionary Condition:Boundaries as Philosophical PuzzlesThe upsurge of Idealist philosophies is the creativity of transition one expectswhen an organizational base changes. But what of the generations after thetransition? The German universities, the first to undergo the revolution, werealso the first to repudiate Idealism and settle down into academic routine.Nevertheless, German philosophy continued to be creative, even underwentnew rounds of intellectual upheaval: materialist, positivist, logicist, phenomenological,existentialist, and others. We are used to seeing the Germanuniversity system as a trendsetter, from the time of Feuerbach to the time ofCarnap and Heidegger. This familiarity hides a theoretical problem.Previously in world history we have seen academicization produce notcreativity but stagnation: a tendency toward rote learning, the scholasticizationof minute commentaries on old texts, intellectual conservatism rather thaninnovation. The pattern exists for the examination system and its preparatoryschools in China, for Greco-Roman municipal lecturers, Islamic madrasas, andlate Hindu sectarian schools. At best, there is a creative burst in the firstgenerations, as when the ancient Greek schools were first established in thetime of Socrates’ pupils, and again in the founding period of the medievalChristian university, before the scholastic rigidification of the 1300s. How thencan we account for the creative surge of the European universities, extendingfour or five generations into the 1930s and possibly beyond?One difference is that creativity in the modern university rides on theongoing process of disciplinary specialization. Chinese, Greek, Islamic, Hindu,and late medieval Christian schools stagnated in scholasticism; in each casetheir curricula became stuck in a set number of fields. The European universitypattern, in contrast, has generated an ongoing stream of new specializations.It is the process of breaking off, and the resulting opportunities for newcombinations of ideas, that drives creativity within the academic system.Here we encounter a second problem. Perhaps the university as a wholeprospers under this pattern; but does it not mean that philosophy is sucked dry688of its contents by the growth of autonomous specialties? The death of philosophyhas often been proclaimed on just these grounds. The anti-Hegelians ofthe 1840s declared philosophy to be failed science, just as the logical positivistsof the 1920s were willing to replace it with a branch of mathematics, and theordinary language philosophers of the 1950s would replace it with a scienceof language use. Nevertheless, philosophy has prospered in the world of thedisciplines. It has been able to create new meta-positions by taking the stanceof looking down on the disciplinary strife from above. And disciplines haveprovided a social mechanism for creativity within philosophy: the migrationof individuals from one field to another, often between tight and soft spotswithin the academic labor market.Since Germany underwent the university revolution two generations beforethe other university systems, German philosophy experienced the disciplinarybreaks and repercussions that much sooner. The first wave, the 1820s throughthe 1840s, centered on theology; out of this came the split of Left and Right,Old and Young Hegelians, who churned up first religious reform and thenpolitical radicalism (see Figure 13.1). On the heels of this wave came another,the battle between Idealist Naturphilosophie and the differentiating scientificresearch disciplines. Philosophers in Hegel’s generation were still teachingcourses in astronomy and mathematics; and although the medical facultyprovided an independent base for some researchers, it was not until the 1860sthat a separate faculty for natural science split off from the philosophicalfaculty. As the height of the struggle for independence in the 1850s, anti-Idealismwas rife among the leaders of the new laboratory researchers; the mostextreme of their public spokesmen, Moleschott and Büchner, trumpeted reductionistmaterialism as a liberation from philosophical religion. Several otherstruggles splashed their waves in this basin: history versus philosophy—theoldest and most prestigeful of the social sciences against the Hegelian Idealismwhich claimed history for its own turf—and psychology versus philosophy, thefirst major disciplinary split inside the traditional philosophical terrain.Neo-Kantianism was the omnibus movement of philosophy in Germanyfrom the 1860s onward because it adjudicated such border disputes: theology,natural science, history, psychology, and more to come. Neo-Kantianism madeevery disciplinary question into an opportunity for creating a correspondingphilosophy. Attacks on philosophy were converted from death threats intogrowth industries.Neo-Kantianism repudiated Idealism, with its ontological claims as a religionof reason, so offensive to old guard theologians, and its a priori scientifictheories, offensive to empirical researchers. “Back to Kant” became the sloganfollowing the death of the Idealist systems, precisely because Kant epitomizedthe reflexive tools of epistemology: the study of what is presupposed in anyThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 689FIGURE 13.1. GERMAN NETWORK, 1835–1900: NEO-KANTIANS,HISTORICISTS, POSITIVISTS, PSYCHOLOGISTS690 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsstatement of knowledge. Neo-Kantians now took as their turf the task ofclassifying various kinds of fields of knowledge by examining their conceptualpresuppositions.Already at the height of controversy between Idealism and materialism inthe 1850s, Lotze, a medical researcher who had migrated into a chair ofphilosophy, became the most famous German philosopher of his day by proposingto adjust the disciplinary spheres. Rejecting Hegel’s superiority ofconcepts over empirical findings, Lotze found the properly metaphysical territorynot in ontology but in the distinction between a realm of value and thevalue-indifferent: the task of philosophy is to confer meaning on the meaninglessmaterial world. Another border adjustment was proposed by Helmholtz,a star researcher and laboratory-founding entrepreneur with network connectionsin the Idealist establishment. Helmholtz declared that philosophy andscience are harmonized because Kant’s a priori categories have been found builtinto the human nervous system. Where Lotze had adjudicated philosophy’sturf as that of values, another strategy was to make it the terrain of epistemology.Zeller in 1862 promulgated the catchword Erkenntnistheorie (theory ofknowledge), endorsing the position that Kantian categories are vindicated bythe physiology of perception. Full-scale launching of the Neo-Kantian movementfollowed in 1866, when F. A. Lange published his Geschichte des Materialismus,declaring that Idealism and materialism alike are metaphysics of thething-in-itself prohibited by the Kantian critique (Willey, 1978; Köhnke, 1991).When psychology emerged as a research science, philosophy once againadjusted its meta-position. Kant had made clear that his categories are priorto all experience, but in the absence of a research science investigating consciousness,it was easy to fall back onto a glib defense of the categories asempirically justified. The border between epistemology and psychology sharpenedwhen Wundt founded his psychological laboratory at Leipzig in 1875.Wundt was a former assistant of Helmholtz whose career in physiology wasblocked because the chairs were all filled by the previous cohort. Migratingonto the more abundant job market in philosophy, Wundt proposed to turnthis archaic discipline into the empirical field of psychology, the scientific studyof consciousness (Ben-David and Collins, 1966). In the 1880s and 1890sWundt’s pupils, along with parallel chains emanating from Lotze’s studentsStumpf and G. E. Muller, and from Brentano, spread the experimental psychologyapproach throughout the German-speaking universities; growth waspromoted especially successfully by foreign students who carried the methodto America.The Neo-Kantian philosophers took the opposite tack. Cognitive constructsper se are not to be confused with psychological operations; the latter exist onan empirical level and are subject to investigation by empirical methods, whileThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 691the former have meaning, structure, or validity in their own sphere. HermannCohen, founder of the Marburg school, resurrected Kant’s distinction of transcendentalfoundations and subsequent empirical investigation. When in 1875Cohen repudiated the physiological interpretation of Kant, he was rejectingthe intrusion of Helmholtz’s medical science into philosophical terrain. At thesame time that Helmholtz’s former assistant, Wundt, was going full blast withhis imperialist naturalism, the Marburg school launched a program of investigatingthe constitutive logic of the disciplines, from mathematics to jurisprudence.Philosophy was not reduced to psychological research, but remained aliveon its own terrain. Zeller’s pupil Dilthey formulated a “critique of historicalreason.” Dilthey’s distinction of Geisteswissenschaften from Naturwissenschaftenproclaimed new lines of alliance, putting history and philosophy, alongwith the newer cultural and social sciences, on the side of spirit, where theyare investigated with the methods of hermeneutic interpretation, against thesciences of dead matter and their methods of causality. Windelband, leader ofthe so-called Baden school of Neo-Kantianism, in turn pointed out that thedistinction between nature and spirit did not fit the actual procedures of theexisting disciplines, especially the new psychology, which applied experimentalmethods to the spirit. Windelband instead distinguished the disciplines accordingto the aspect under which they investigate reality: nomothetic search forgeneral principles or idiographic description of particularities. His protégéRickert in turn proposed that when we take an idiographic interest, ourknowledge depends not on objects themselves but on their value-relevance,which guides concept formation. Culture is the mode in which we see the worldas a totality of value-relevances; nature is the mode in which we see it inrelation to laws.Almost everything in Germany at turn of the century was touched byNeo-Kantianism. Simmel (a pupil of Dilthey and Brentano and friend of theBaden school) introduced the philosophy of forms and the tones of hermeneuticempathy into sociology. Max Weber, another of Dilthey’s pupils, and a friendof Rickert, explicitly advocated Neo-Kantian methods in carving out a territoryfor the new discipline around the time Weber helped found the GermanSociological Association in 1908. Cohen’s pupil Cassirer rejected the separationof natural science from the domain inhabited by the humanistic disciplines;Windelband’s ideographic-nomothetic distinction does not hold, he said, sincea judgment always unites both universality and particularity. Cassirer gavelicense for philosophers to range widely in the general investigation of symbolicforms, which he proceeded to do with studies ranging from relativity physicsto seeking the universal and perennial across the history of philosophy andthe arts.692 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsA third party in German philosophy between the movement of experimentalpsychologists and the Neo-Kantians was led by Brentano. He too had hisstrategy for re-elevating philosophy amidst the disciplines. Philosophy, he held,can become a progressive science because its topic is the study of empiricalconsciousness; psychology is on firmer grounds than any of the physicalsciences because it alone rests on the certainty of inner perception. So farpsychology is the master discipline, but the sensory and associative laws of theWundtian laboratories and the British empiricists alike are wrongheaded becausethey miss the central point: consciousness consists not in content but inacts. The chief domain of mental acts is the “intentional,” whereby the mindintends an object, giving it mental existence whether it exists externally or inimagination; as against Neo-Kantianism, the mind always reaches out toobjects rather than passively screening objects through categories. Brentanowas the most influential academic lecturer at the end of the century. At Viennaduring 1874–1895, he taught Husserl, Meinong, Stumpf, Scheler, Simmel, andTwardowski, who began the Polish school of logicians, as well as Buber andFreud. Psychoanalysis and phenomenology were products of Brentano’s pupils;the founders of Gestalt psychology were his grandpupils.After the turn of the century, Brentano’s position dissolved in a new arrayof schools, and psychology crystallized out as a separate discipline. Neo-Kantianismtoo broke down, coming under attack both from the philosophicallyoriented physicists in the Vienna Circle and from Heidegger’s theologicallyoriented phenomenology. This was a reversal of alliances. Neo-Kantianism wasgenerally close to positivism in its earlier phases: both shared the view thatthere is no thing-in-itself, and that science is a formal representation of thesurface of phenomenological experience. Rather than undermining other disciplines,Neo-Kantianism gave them a supporting rationale. In another direction,Dilthey and Rickert reserved a realm for spiritual culture that protectedtheology against the reductionism of scientific militants and secularists. Nevertheless,in a fashion typical of intellectual change, the revolution took placewithin the very networks of the establishment. The Vienna Circle began as arevolt against Neo-Kantianism, but it was also a revolt within Neo-Kantianism.The networks tell a different story from the familiar ideological surface: mostof the leaders of the generation of 1900–1935—Schlick, Carnap, but alsoHusserl, Scheler, and Heidegger—came from the breakup of Neo-Kantianism.Against these German trends, English academic life for most of the centuryseemed archaic. England’s academic revolution did not occur until 1860–1870.Before that time, philosophy remained within the mold of the Enlightenmentlay intellectual. At the same time, England’s industrialization and democratizationput it in the lead in forming public political movements and thus in thecreation of the activist social sciences. The result was a very different patternThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 693from contemporary Germany: instead of the struggles of post-Idealism amidstthe new academic disciplines, we see the formation of Utilitarian economicsand political thought, along with movements of non-university natural scientistswho united under the secularizing banner of evolutionism. After 1870academicization set in with the familiar upsurge of Idealism; it also producedsome distinctively British philosophical combinations when the academic Idealistssettled affairs with non-academic Utilitarians, and then when a youngergeneration settled affairs with them. Before 1870 British universities had remainedold-fashioned, but one discipline that was well established within themwas mathematics, albeit a rather traditionalistic version. This too had philosophicalconsequences. As British mathematicians struggled to update theirfield, they found themselves in the midst of what looked to the traditional eyelike paradoxes in the elementary parts of algebra. Another border becameintensely scrutinized, resulting in a lineage of British mathematician-philosopherswhich burst into full bloom in the generation of Russell and Whitehead.Border struggles are often nasty, as they involve challenges to old identities.Shucking off old skins is painful, and all the more so when it is a militantnewcomer who is pulling the skin off someone else. We can never take thesedisputes at face value. The boundary issues which instigate so much of modernphilosophy may begin in particular disciplines, but philosophy transmuteseverything into its own key. What starts in one ideological tune often ends upin an entirely different one by the time counter-movements and philosophicalreflexivity have done their work.Meta-territories upon the Science-Philosophy BorderDisciplinary differentiation stimulates philosophy in several phases. First thereis the struggle for separation, promoting accompanying ideologies of independencesuch as the materialism of the 1850s. Next, when the new disciplinesare safely institutionalized, philosophy makes its peace with them; it is in thisniche that Neo-Kantianism flourished, presiding over the conceptual map ofdisciplinary spaces. Third, once a variety of disciplines exist in the university,there arises the possibility of disciplinary imperialism, bringing new mixturesof ideas and new networks of personnel into play. Such flows often intrude onphilosophical turf, in part because any issue pursued at a sufficiently high levelof abstraction has an affinity for philosophical argument, and in part becausephilosophy was the largest and softest labor market. Migration of medicalphysiologists into philosophy produced experimental psychology; an influxof mathematicians promoted both logical positivism and phenomenology.Through the dynamics of social conflict, in response to such border-crossing694 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscomes a fourth kind of philosophical creativity: counter-movements to keepchallengers out.Modern philosophies are heavily influenced by the expansion of sciencewithin the universities, but not, as contemporary ideologies often had it, bybecoming a mere branch or ancillary of science. The dynamics of intellectualnetworks, including the way they adjust to changes in the organizationalbase, remain fundamentally the same throughout world history. If modernEuropean intellectuals differ from their predecessors, it is by adding onto thebasic mechanisms they share with Asian and with ancient and medieval Westernphilosophers two further developments: rapid-discovery science and theautonomous research university with its proliferation of specialized disciplines.Modern academic philosophy, as the most abstract and reflexive of disciplines,takes as its problem space the results of these two revolutions. That is whymathematics became the instigator of so much of modern philosophy, even onthe rebound and in fields far removed from logic and philosophy of science.Methodological disputes built up within mathematics when the disciplinebecame academicized. From the foundational crisis of mathematics at theturn of the century flowed the logical positivism of the 1920s, coming intofull bloom in the Vienna Circle by meshing with methodological disputes inphysics and with Neo-Kantianism. Another branch of the same networksproduced phenomenology, which gradually sharpened its rivalry with andrejection of the mathematicians by giving birth to existentialism. The intrusionof logical formalism into philosophy energized in reaction a third large movementof twentieth-century philosophy, ordinary language. Both directly andthrough the dynamics of intellectual conflict, the major schools of modernphilosophy all resulted from interdisciplinary pressures originating in mathematicalscience.There is a deeper sociological reason why this would be so: by the generationof 1835–1865, mathematics had become the intellectual network whichhad achieved the highest degree of self-consciousness on its structures ofargument; indeed, to a large extent this focus on its own operations constitutesthe subject matter of higher mathematics. The next round of philosophy wastaken over by the concepts and controversies arising from this new pitch ofintellectual reflexivity.Disciplinary border-crossings flow both ways at various times. First, modernrapid-discovery science proclaimed its independence, even its supersessionof philosophy; not long after, scientists were creating issues at a high level ofabstraction that eventually bid to capture the center of the philosophicalattention space. The movement of formal logic was created largely by mathematiciansmigrating onto philosophical turf. Frege, Boole, and Peano wereThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 695mathematicians their entire professional lives; Bolzano was primarily a mathematician,and Peirce’s only academic appointment was in a mathematics department;Russell, Whitehead, and Husserl all began as mathematicians beforefinding positions in philosophy; Carnap and Wittgenstein studied mathematicalscience before entering the philosophical network.The pioneers of formal logic received scant attention in their own times.Mathematical logic was a tangential interest among mathematicians as amongphilosophers, and it is a good question how this obscure area became the definingidentity of a large movement of twentieth-century philosophers. Withinphilosophy, formal logic was regarded as a stagnant area where little of importancehad been developed for centuries. Midcentury tendencies toward aninductive logic (such as those of Whewell and Mill) further denigrated thetraditional syllogistic forms, leading away from a logical calculus and towardempiricism. Nevertheless, within the German philosophical attention space,deductive logic was slowly rising as a topic of controversy. On one side, Cohenand the Neo-Kantians identified philosophy with the investigation of the logicsguaranteeing the validity of each intellectual discipline; on the other side, themovements of Wundt and Brentano proposed to derive logic from empiricalpsychology. This empiricist tendency acquired increasing fame in the 1880sand 1890s as the physicist Mach joined forces with the new laboratory psychologists,grounding his phenomenalist positivism on the propensity of thenervous system toward economy of thought.The self-conscious takeoff of the formal logic movement came with Russelland his network in the early 1900s. It then became an ideology within philosophy,expanding beyond the specialized enterprise of building a logic systemfor the foundations of mathematics into a program to reconstruct all ofphilosophy and purge everything which could not be reconstructed. The logicalformalists claimed to be putting first mathematics, then science in general, ona secure foundation. In fact these issues had arisen over and above the actualpractice of scientists and mathematicians, and doubtless their fields would havecontinued much the same without the activity of the logicians. This is why themathematicians who discovered the new logical tools tended to migrate ontophilosophical turf, where they could get a better hearing.Typically an intellectual movement in philosophy is fruitful when it opensa vein of troubles. Counterintuitively, the largest philosophical attention-getteris not a method which solves all its problems as promised; this would dry upthe life flow of the field, leaving nothing for later generations to work on. Asuccessful movement hits on a method which seems to promise a great deal,while in fact encountering unanticipated difficulties. These problems give riseto new efforts at solution, and to rival tendencies within the movement; theresult is intellectual conflicts which publicize and energize, provoking further696 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscreativity and sometimes ending up far from the starting place. The originalthrust of Frege’s method was fruitful in all these senses. The takeoff came atjust the time when Russell was promoting his famous paradox about higherordersets. Now the movement had not merely the straightforward path ofcarrying out the formalist program in mathematics, but also a branch concernedwith the underlying problems of set theory. Frege’s Platonism, initiallyan innocuous position within mathematics, opened all sorts of controversieswhen it was expanded into militant claims about truth and meaningfulness.And the assumption that logic is the foundational language of mathematics,when widened into a program for all of language, turned into an almost polaropposite by the end of Wittgenstein’s tortuous career. The logical formalistsprovide one of the strongest proofs that a philosophical movement lives noton its solutions but on its problems.The Social Invention of Higher MathematicsMathematics by the time of Frege had become very different from that familiarto Kant. In the 1700s the field consisted mostly of analysis, exploring thebranches of Leibnizian calculus and their applications in physical science. Byaround 1780, the belief had become widespread among leading mathematiciansthat mathematics had exhausted itself, that there was little left to discover.1 Unexpectedly, the following century was the most flamboyant in thehistory of the field, proliferating new areas and opening the realms of abstracthigher mathematics.The sudden expansion of creativity arose from shifts in the social bases ofmathematics. Competition for recognition increased with a large expansion inthe numbers of mathematicians. The older bases for full-time professionalmathematicians had consisted of the official academies of science, notablyParis, along with Berlin, St. Petersburg, and a few others. The foundation ofthe École Polytechnique in 1794 introduced continuity of training for a highlyselected group of students while providing teaching positions for the mostcreative. In Germany, the new public school system widened the selection netto pick up penurious students of potential talent (such as Gauss, a mathematicalparallel to Fichte in this respect). The university reform extended to mathematicsthe emphasis on innovative research, as well as giving a distinctive slanttoward pure knowledge apart from practical application. The process of disciplinarydifferentiation split math from physics and astronomy, encouragingthe tendency to abstraction.Along with these organizational changes came journals devoted largely orwholly to mathematics, beginning with the journal of the École Polytechniquein 1794, and the private journals of Crelle in Germany in 1826 and LiouvilleThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 697in France in 1836. Competition among journal editors for notable pieces, andthe rush of mathematicians to anticipate opponents in publication, must haveheightened emotional energy, while the specialized journals focused attentioninward on the mathematical community in its own right (Boyer, 1985: 561;Collins and Restivo, 1983). Cauchy, who controlled the official publication ofthe Académie, was famous for rushing into print, and for unsavory tactics toanticipate or block his competitors. Mathematicians from peripheral countriesor low-status positions, such as the Norwegian Abel and the École NormaleSupérieure student Galois, were scandalously treated when they attempted toget their work published in Paris during 1826–1832. Nevertheless, their workcame to light through the support of the editors of the new journals, who nodoubt were looking for material to launch their enterprises with a splash.2Two results of these conditions were a movement toward rigor and thetakeoff into pure abstraction. The mathematicians of the previous centuryin exploring analysis had left behind the deductive proofs of the Euclideanmethod; they argued by induction from particular examples, from intuition orphysical cases. General theorems were often guessed at and left without proof.Without any inquiring into their validity, new concepts were used such as theconvergence of series and integrals, differentials of higher order, infinitesimalincrements, and procedures which amounted to discarding terms and dividingby zero (Kline, 1972: 392–394, 616–618, 1024; Kitcher, 1984: 235). Rigorwas disregarded in part because mathematics was interpreted physically; aslong as empirically useful results were obtained in the sciences, proofs wereconsidered needless subtleties. Socially this attitude was a product of the lackof differentiation between the activity of the mathematician and the physicistor even the engineer. D’Alembert and others held that the traditional field ofmathematics had now turned into mechanics, and the attitude of disregardingrigor continued among applied mathematicians such as Fourier and Poissoninto the 1820s and 1830s. Even those mathematicians who, like Euler, werecaught up in the game of inventing algorithms had confidence in the manipulationof symbols without inquiring deeply into their meaning; the “machinery”of mathematics was socially convincing because it gave repeatable results.The shift to rigor was driven by the hyper-competitiveness exemplified byCauchy, and by the academicization of mathematics brought about by thePolytechnique and the German universities. Unlike the virtuoso math of theacademies, that taught in the schools was more systematic; scholasticism andpedantry contributed to a more careful statement of fundamentals (Grabiner,1986). Even though the Polytechnique was intended for the training of engineers,it underwent a goal displacement typical of academic organization andbegan to treat the standards of mathematics as ends in themselves. Rigor isthe form which bureaucratization takes inside the community of mathemati-698 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscians as formal rules become treated as significant in their own right. In theGerman universities, independence from applied work broke the link withphysical interpretations and eliminated a source of justification for intuitiveconcepts. Rigor was not a sudden realization of old faults but a social shift inrelationships within the mathematical community.In the previous century the lack of rigor had been criticized mainly fromoutside the ranks of mathematicians, by enemies of the scientific worldviewsuch as Berkeley. Mathematicians could see the problem but did not considerit important.3 From their point of view they were right. The rigor of thefollowing generations did not invalidate any of the theorems of previousarithmetic, algebra, or Euclidean geometry but only put them on a new basis;even in analysis the old glaring expressions were remedied by more carefulstatement, but the results continued to be what mathematicians had previouslyknown (Kline, 1972: 1026). It was not a practical matter of improving theutility of mathematics which gave rise to rigor but an internal development inthe social game mathematicians were playing with one another. With Cauchyin the 1820s came the recognition that rigor was a way of beating one’sopponents and simultaneously opening up a new field on which mathematicianscould play. The increase in the numbers of mathematicians, their materialbases, and the means of rival publications all amplified the drive toward newareas of innovation. The older belief that math was becoming stagnant andexhausted gave way to a feeling of unlimited vistas.Rigor and abstract mathematics fed each other. Rigor was promoted byaxiomatization, the return to systematic exposition and proof in the mannerof Euclid, which had constituted the pedantic mathematics of the schools twocenturies before.4 Once the system of axioms was displayed, it became possibleto vary the set, negating or eliminating some axioms and exploring the mathematicalrealm thereby opened up. In this way non-commutative algebras suchas quaternions were developed in the 1840s. The most famous of these developmentswere the non-Euclidean geometries which became widely known inthe 1860s (although formulated in the 1820s and adumbrated as far back asthe 1760s), because they forced the recognition that mathematics had takenleave of physical interpretations.5 In the new game of higher mathematics,entities were deliberately constructed whose properties are paradoxical fromthe point of view of common sense: continuous functions without derivativesat any point over an interval (Bolzano 1834; Weierstrass 1861, 1872); curveswithout length or curves which completely filled a space (Peano 1890); geometriesin n-dimensional space (Cayley 1843, Grassmann 1844; see Boyer, 1985:565, 604, 645; Kline, 1972: 1025, 1029–30). Paradoxes gave even moreimpetus to the movement for rigorization; distrusting spatial intuition andbecoming aware of the naiveté of accepting traditional assumptions as self-evi-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 699dent, mathematicians began to split into rival movements for shoring upfoundations.By the 1860s, above all in Germany, recognition had dawned that a largepart of mathematics consists in investigating arbitrary and abstract conceptswithout physical referents or even conventional geometric representation onpaper. The result was a movement toward rebuilding the various branches ofmathematics on numbers, arithmetizing analysis and geometry. Numbers, too,the last bastion of realist interpretation, came under scrutiny in the 1870s and1880s by Weierstrass, Dedekind, Cantor, and Frege. When Cantor in 1879–1884 demonstrated the existence of transfinite numbers—successive orders ofinfinity—the movement of rigorization broke into open scandal. Kronecker,the powerful journal editor in Berlin, opposed publication of papers whichcreated unnatural monstrosities, which he attributed to the methodologicalfallacy of using derivations going beyond finite series of steps. For Kronecker,only the natural numbers really exist; in defending a conservative position inthis respect, he was provoked into formulating a radical program to reconstructall of mathematics, which after 1900 became the intuitionist program. Cantor,who foreshadowed the formalists, was clearly aware of the power struggletaking place over the nature and organization of mathematics. In 1883 heargued that the distinctiveness of mathematics as a field is its freedom to createits own concepts without regard for reality (Kline, 1972: 1031). To back uphis position, he pushed for the separation of German mathematicians from theGesellschaft Deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte, and became the foundingpresident of the Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung in 1891, and organizerof the first International Congress of Mathematicians in 1897, a stronghold ofthe formalist movement (Dauben, 1979; Collins and Restivo, 1983). Theformalists represent the tendency of autonomous specialization in mathematicsat its most extreme.Frege’s Anti-psychologistic LogicIt was in this context that Frege developed his project to found arithmetic onlogic. In the process he had to create a usable logic. It was hardly a matter ofsupporting one discipline on a more prestigeful one; mathematics was muchmore advanced, and the prestige of logic dates largely from the adoption ofFrege’s system.Logic was in the air, but the strongest winds were blowing from anotherdirection. Just at this time the Neo-Kantians were intruding as usual into otherspecialties. Cohen and the Marburg school (starting in 1874) made a programout of investigating the logics of the various disciplines; the regulatory logic ofjurisprudence, for instance, is ethics; other fields—mathematics, education, so-700 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscial justice, physics—each has its underlying logic. Psychologists too spottedlogic as an old and stagnant field ripe for reform by new scientific methods.Brentano launched his Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint in 1874,which transforms all propositions into acts of judgment in empirical consciousness.6 Brentano attempted to eliminate deductive, a priori logic and replace itwith purely empirical judgments about objects. In the next year Wundt establishedthe first psychological research laboratory, and touted psychology as anexperimental science which would become the basis of all the human sciencesand of philosophy as well. Logic was to be founded on scientifically discoveredstructures of the human psyche. Another branch of inductivist logic madeinroads in Germany by import. A militant scientific movement in England hadled the intellectual opposition to the unreformed religious universities; in theperson of J. S. Mill, it took on the scholastic logic and proposed to replace itwith a logic of empirical induction.Frege’s creativity was sparked by opposition to these movements. In hiswritings his principal foil is Mill and the latter’s German followers; as psychologismflourished in the 1880s and 1890s, Frege’s anti-psychologism grewmore pointed. Frege saw a very different logic opening up from the mathematicalcontroversies now coming to a head, owing to his position in themathematical network as well as the philosophical one. As a student Frege hadheard Lotze and had studied mathematics at Göttingen, the great center ofGerman mathematics, where Riemann produced his generalizing work onnon-Euclidean geometry in the 1850s. Frege became a friend of Cantor, nearbyat Halle, already embattled in his struggle against the conservative mathematicians;it was Cantor’s tools that Frege developed.In 1879 Frege formulated in his Begriffsschrift (conceptual notation) thefirst comprehensive or general logic (Kneale and Kneale, 1984: 510–511;Coffa, 1991: 69–71). Traditional logic descending from Aristotle (what wouldnow be called primary logic) was restricted to classifying various kinds ofpropositions. To some extent Stoic and medieval scholastic logic had gone onto formulate general principles underlying valid propositional inference; in themore general arena, Leibniz and later Boole had developed the aspects of logicconcerned with attributes or classes. Frege parted company with logic in theform of subjects and predicates, of “all A’s are B’s.” Ordinary language hidesthe crucial distinctions and elevates merely grammatical differences obscuringthe underlying content. The lineage of ancient Greek logic, institutionalized inlate antiquity in alliance with the profession of grammarians and continued inthe curriculum of the medieval universities, was now displaced by the imperialismof mathematical methods. Modern mathematics arose around 1600 bybreaking with verbally formulated geometry, and developing instead the newtechnical format of variables and functions in one area after another. TheThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 701higher mathematics of the 1800s had proceeded by exploring successively moreabstract levels of the function. Frege’s stroke was to recognize that the centraltool of modern mathematics could be extended to logic.Frege starts not with concepts and what is predicated about them but withjudgments. His key idea is that the step from a judgment or assertion to aconcept is analogous to the mathematical relationship between a function andits variables. Instead of assuming that we already know the concept, Fregebegins with it as an empty frame to be filled.7 From this perspective singularand general representations are entirely different kinds of things, arrived at byvery different procedures: the singular (“this horse”) is a proper name givenindependently of judgment, while the general (“horse,” “horses”) arises onlyafter a judgment has been made.In Frege’s vision, talking about the world does not consist in makingconnections, so to speak, horizontally on a plane; it is a hierarchy of levels.Making use of the technical tool by which the machinery of modern mathematicswas created, Frege introduces a formal symbolism to force automaticrecognition of new conceptual distinctions: using different print fonts to separateclearly use and mention; a symbol indicating that something is asserted,distinguished from what is asserted; strokes which replace “not,” “and,” “or,”“if then”; and the universal quantifier “for every value of x,” which rendersthe distinctions among the “all,” “some,” and “none” of ordinary language.Confusions in the older rhetoric now come into view. To speak of a “quality”had confused the unasserted content with the fact of its being asserted (Coffa,1991: 63). The copula is not something separate which links a subject and itsqualities, but an aspect of the functional statement; for this reason, Frege([1883] 1980: 65) comments, the ontological proof of the existence of Godbreaks down, since existence is not a quality.8Frege came upon the issue by way of clarifying the concept of number.Ordinarily “one” and “unit” are taken as synonymous. If we count threeobjects (1  1  1  3), how is it possible that objects which are differentcan all be treated as identical?9 The number 3 is not an agglomeration of objectscollected together, since they retain their properties which made them distinct;but if we are counting identicals, we never reach a plurality (Frege [1883] 1980:50). The mathematical plus symbol () cannot be interpreted as the “and” ofordinary language. The solution is to recognize number as a self-subsistentobject. Frege considers it the extension of a concept, that is, the set of allinstances which fall under that concept. Frege’s numbers are Platonic; they arenot derived from counting or sequences, nor are they properties abstractedfrom things in the sense that colors are. This shifts our attention to theprocedure by which we make assertions about numbers, to the judgment that702 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe number of the wineglasses on the table is four—a statement of identity asto which number that is.The procedure for establishing numerical identity is independent of counting;it is to establish a one-to-one correlation between the objects in each set,just as a waiter need not count all the silverware but only lay one fork alongsideevery knife (Kneale and Kneale, 1984: 461). Frege goes on to build the entirenumber system by purely logical definitions. Zero he defines as the set of allobjects which are not identical with themselves; this is a logical impossibility,so nothing falls under it (a fateful move in view of Russell’s later paradox).The category zero is absolutely simple in Frege’s assumption, so now he candefine “1” as the set of all sets which are identical with the zero set (not withthe contents of the zero set). Further numbers are built up as sets which containall of the preceding number sets (2 is [zero, 1]; 3 is [zero, 1, 2]; etc.). Paradoxesabout infinite numbers, just then giving rise to scandal because of Cantor’sunending series of transfinite numbers, are taken care of in Frege’s nested levels.The number belonging to the concept “finite number” is an infinite number;it is not a number following in the series of natural numbers. Frege alliedhimself with Cantor, who had begun his theory of sets only a few years earlierin 1874.10 This was an alliance of the radicals against the establishmentcontrolled from Berlin by Kronecker, the rigorist enemy of paradox-generatingabstract methods in mathematics.In 1892 Frege introduced a distinction between sense and reference. Theproblem arises in interpreting the equal sign () in a mathematical equation.If this is strictly a sign of identity, then 1  3  4 can be replaced with 4 4, an uninformative statement. The equation is telling us something, but notabout the referent of either side of the equation; that referent is the numberobject4 in either case. Each side has a sense as well as a reference; the senseof 1  3 is different from the sense of 2  2. The same can be said of verbalexpressions: “the morning star is the same as the evening star” is uninformativeinsofar as both parts refer to the planet Venus; but each expression arises in adifferent semantic context and has a different sense. A referent is an object(which for Frege is not just something perceptible, but can include numbers,times, and so on). The sense is on a different plane, the semantic means bywhich referents are singled out for attention (Kneale and Kneale, 1984: 496;Wedberg, 1984: 113–122). Propositions as well as names and expressions havereferents; for Frege, the referent of a proposition is its truth value. Thus alltrue propositions have the same referent, the True, just as all false propositionsrefer to the False.11 Frege’s sense-reference distinction was not picked up untilthe 1920s, when Carnap began to use it in a strongly reductive program,counting propositions as scientific only if every name in them has not onlyThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 703sense but also reference. Frege’s Platonism, when broadened into an epistemology,gave rise to the imperious claims of logical positivism.At the same time Frege opened the path for Wittgenstein and the recognitionthat a language or symbol system contains multiple levels. He forces usto see that all our intellectual activity takes place in a language, and exposesconfusions between various levels within the language and what the languageis talking about. One offshoot was the belief that philosophical problems aremerely mistakes of this sort, which could be cleared away by careful analysis.Both the positivist and the analytical movements eventually discovered thatmatters could not be disposed of so easily. That too was foreshadowed in Frege.The world is more complex than is apparent in subjects and predicates, or inthe distinction between the factual-empirical realm and the logical-conceptual.Frege points out that making definitions is not an arbitrary act of subjectivecreation; definitions show their worth by their fruitfulness in the chain ofargument. Definitions have consequences that cannot be known in advance.“The mathematician cannot create things at will, any more than the geographercan; he too can only discover what is there and give it a name.” Yet “observationitself already includes within it a logical activity” (Frege [1883] 1980:99, 108). Recasting the refinements of abstract mathematical argument intotools for philosophy, Frege opened a puzzle space containing room for manypositions.In the eyes of the twentieth-century formalist school, the greatest figure ofthe previous century was Frege. He is depicted as the turning point in allmodern histories of logic (Wedberg, 1984; Kneale and Kneale, 1984; Dummett,1981; Coffa, 1991). In his time Frege was a minor figure, a mathematician ina not particularly eminent department (Jena, much declined from its glorydays), unrecognized by his profession and never promoted to Ordinarius. Hebecame known primarily because Russell drew on him as both ally and foil ina more prominent network of controversies.12 Frege was not entirely isolatedin the networks, but he was treated as supernumerary among the more centraldebates of the German attention space. Eventually the creative splits of themathematical network came into contact around him. In the late 1890s Fregecorresponded with the formalist radicals Peano, and Hilbert, the future leaderof one wing of the mathematical foundations controversy. A few years beforehis encounter with Russell in 1902, Frege entered into correspondence withHusserl, another ex-mathematician working on the broader implications of thefoundations of mathematics. Creativity occurs by structural opposition andrecombination of networks. In Husserl, two antagonistic networks come together.When Frege critiqued Husserl’s book in 1894, he made contact with apupil of Brentano, the most famous representative of the empiricist logic whichFrege was combatting. Frege is a central node in the formative period of both704 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsgreat movements of the early 1900s, movements that would grow up into thedivide between logical positivism and phenomenology.Advantages of Provinciality:The British Route from Algebra to PhilosophyModern logical philosophy comes from the convergence of two lines, Germanand British. Russell, who brought them together, was the product of a Britishnetwork going back several generations. As in Germany, British logic wasproduced largely by mathematicians. It is not obvious why British mathematicsshould have become creative in the 1830s, for it had been stagnant since thedeath of Newton. The social conditions which supported the advance ofmathematics on the Continent were lacking: Britain had neither the educationalreforms of the German universities or the École Polytechnique nor the virtuosomathematics of the academies. British mathematics had been largely in thehands of the universities on the old unreformed model, where the Newtoniancalculus of fluxions had become a scholastic tradition to be upheld against theLeibnizian rival.When British mathematics came alive, it was in connection with the movementfor university modernization on Continental lines. The Cambridge AnalyticalSociety was founded in 1813 at Trinity College to introduce Continentaldevelopments in analysis; its youthful members, later to become famous invarious fields, included Herschel (the future astronomer), Babbage, Whewell,and Peacock. In 1817 Peacock substituted differential for Newtonian fluxionalnotation in the mathematics tripos; he remained active lifelong in the movementfor university reform. The network of reformers flowing from this groupcarried on a long struggle, to a considerable extent by exodus and detour fromthe traditional universities. Peacock’s student De Morgan refused a universityposition because of the religious test, going instead to the reforming UniversityCollege at London; for similar reasons Cayley (another Trinity pupil) andSylvester (De Morgan’s pupil, debarred as a Jew) spent long years in privatelife, at minor technicals schools, or in America, until positions opened for themat Cambridge and Oxford after the university reforms. Jevons, another of DeMorgan’s pupils, got his position at Owens College, the reform-oriented predecessorof Manchester University.British mathematics owes its distinctive orientation to the advantages ofcomparative backwardness. Whereas Continental mathematics was concernedwith the complexities of higher analysis, geometry, number theory, and thesolvability of equations, British mathematics dug into the relatively elementaryfeatures of algebra (Richards, 1988; Kline, 1972: 773–776, 797, 805; Boyer,1985: 621–626; Enros, 1981; Cannon, 1978: chap. 3). Ever since Berkeley inThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 7051734 had attacked Newton’s infinitesimals, British mathematicians had beenon the defensive. Around 1830 there was a wave of controversy over the useof imaginary numbers in algebraic practice, despite their lack of a physicalinterpretation. Conservatives grew more aggressive during the escalating conflictagainst Continentally oriented reformers. Not only imaginary numbers butnegative numbers as well cannot be said to exist; how then could any validmathematics be built upon them? It was not the first time a conservative attackhas provoked fundamental innovation.In 1830 Peacock attempted to put algebra on axiomatic foundations similarto Euclidean geometry, which is to say on the model of the school classic andfavorite of academic conservatives. Peacock thereby brought into the open thebasic principles of arithmetic operations, the associative, commutative, anddistributive laws; by abstraction from real numbers, he attempted to justify(but actually asserted only by fiat) that similar rules hold good for operationswith any magnitudes, including complex numbers. In the same year De Morganbegan to publish on double algebra (i.e., the algebra of complex numbers,combining a real number with an imaginary). The intentions of Peacock andDe Morgan were traditional, in that they denied any other forms of algebrawere possible than those following the laws governing positive integers; theirmodel was empirical science, and they gave no truth value to an abstractmathematics in its own right (Richards, 1980). This attempt to incorporatehigher mathematics into the conservative framework of non-specialist liberaleducation still prevailing in the English universities led to revolutionary combinations.Peacock’s and De Morgan’s work provoked efforts to extend the methodof representing complex numbers graphically as vectors on a plane. The Irishphysicist W. R. Hamilton in the 1830s gave a quasi-physical interpretation ofoperations on complex numbers as rotations in a plane; for a number of yearshe attempted to extend this method to rotations in three dimensions, and in1843 realized that the method would work only if one dropped the commutativelaw of multiplication. The resulting new form of algebra, quaternions,became famous because of the shock it gave traditional belief that the laws ofarithmetic are natural. In fact the discovery came directly out of efforts to finda physical justification for imaginary numbers. Hamilton’s methods attemptedto rescue them by a spatial analogy, but at the cost of giving up traditionaloperations.13In logic the conservative situation of British education again set the directionof innovation. Just as Euclidean geometry dominated the mathematics curriculumof the schools, logic—a field which had been abolished in the Frenchcurriculum and transformed in Germany into metaphysics—still loomed largein the philosophy course. The movement for modernization and scientific re-706 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsform thus included attempts to replace Aristotelean syllogistic logic with a newlogic of empirical inquiry. This was the subject of Whewell’s work at Trinity,Cambridge, in the 1830s and of John Stuart Mill’s first book, the source of hisearly fame, his Logic in 1843. On the side of the algebraists, De Morgan inthe 1840s extended his axiomatization into logic. This brought him into apublic dispute over priority with Sir William Hamilton (not to be confusedwith the physicist W. R. Hamilton) in 1847. Conflicts typically lead to wideningthe network of allies; in the same year Boole’s first book, The MathematicalAnalysis of Logic, was prompted by Boole’s intervening in the dispute on DeMorgan’s side.De Morgan and Boole were reformers, mathematical imperialists on theturf of logic. Sir William Hamilton was a philosophical conservative. AnEdinburgh law professor, Hamilton had acquired the chair of logic and metaphysicsin 1836 for his defense of traditional religion after the manner of theScottish common-sense philosophy. Reid and Stewart had rebutted Humeanskepticism by a classification of innate human faculties, including a faculty ofcommon sense. In 1829—just the time when Carlyle was popularizing Germanphilosophy at Edinburgh—Hamilton updated the position against the growinginfluence of Kant. Hamilton denied Kant’s antinomies; by the law of contradiction,either space is infinite or it is not, although we cannot know which.There is direct knowledge through the senses of the existence of objects,although what they are must be inferred through logic. In conflicts conservatismcannot stay static; Hamilton too overthrows syllogistic logic as makinginadequate distinctions. His doctrine holds that the quantities “all,” “some,”and “none” apply to the predicate as well as the subject. “All men are mortal”is ambiguous; it could mean “all men are all mortals” (i.e., only men aremortal) or “all men are some (of the) mortals.” Hamilton’s quantification ofthe predicate was buried in his better-known philosophical system and becameknown only in the 1840s, when Hamilton raised a priority dispute with DeMorgan.14 Since Hamilton by now was the most famous British philosopherof his day, he made an excellent sounding board for De Morgan’s logic.15Boole’s Laws of Thought (1854) generalized this controversy over the mostelementary parts of arithmetic. Boole was an autodidact, a mathematics teacherat an elementary school, seemingly an unlikely person to contribute to thefrontiers of mathematics. But Boole looks less like an anomaly when we seethat individuals with limited formal education dominated the philosophy networkin the British midcentury generation, unlike at most other times: Spencer,Huxley, Lewes, George Eliot, Buckle all are similar to Boole in this respect.Non-academic creativity in philosophy peaked in the 1840s through the 1860s.This was the period when the traditional university system was most undercriticism and alternative bases for intellectual networks were expanding—prin-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 707cipally the middle-class journals of opinion on which the circle of Londonevolutionists supported themselves. Mathematics, however, was more closelyattached to academic bases; Boole made his first connection here in the early1840s by publishing, in the Cambridge Mathematical Journal, some elementarybut pioneering work in the computation of algebraic invariants—one of thealternative algebras which Cayley was to develop (Kline, 1972: 927). Personalcorrespondence with De Morgan at the time of the Hamilton controversybrought Boole recognition and an academic position in Ireland.Boole takes Peacock and De Morgan a step further. Mathematics is nolonger to be seen as the science of magnitudes, but as a general method foroperations with symbols of whatever content. Boolean algebra redefines arithmeticaloperations as unions and intersections of sets. Subsequently Boole’sideas were applied in Jevons’s “logical piano” (1869)—a combination of logicmachine and mechanical calculator—and in Venn’s diagrams of 1881 (Knealeand Kneale, 1984: 420–421; Boyer, 1985: 672).Most of the action in British algebra-cum-logic took place within theoverlapping branches of a network (see Figure 13.2). One node is TrinityCollege, Cambridge, beginning with the mathematical and logical reformersPeacock, Herschel, Babbage, and Whewell, who produced a chain of pupilsincluding De Morgan, Cayley, Sylvester, and Jevons, with Boole as an offshoot.Another lineage descends from the Utilitarian circle of philosophical radicalsaround Bentham and James Mill. By midcentury this group had spawned twosuccessor groups: one at London, the Huxley–Spencer–George Eliot circle ofanti-religious evolutionists; the other branch played back into Trinity College,where a circle formed in the 1850s around John Grote, younger brother ofGeorge Grote, who had belonged to the original Utilitarians. Among Grote’sprotégés were Venn and Sidgwick; the latter, who wrote the great work ofethics on modified Utilitarian principles, was the teacher of McTaggart andG. E. Moore. Together with Cayley, professor of mathematics at Cambridgefrom the 1860s down to his death in 1895, this constituted an intergenerationalnetwork leading directly to Whitehead and Russell.The network was about to become fateful in philosophy. It also stimulatedthe creativity of another characteristic British field. British economics wascreated by much the same network we have been reviewing in philosophy:Locke, Hume, and Smith in the core philosophical networks of their time;Ricardo (1817) and J. S. Mill (1848) in the Utilitarian circles. The earlieringredients were a non-academic social movement, combined with the analyticalprinciples generated by an intellectual network. When the British universitiesreformed in the 1860s, economics now became academic, meshing withthe nearest adjacent disciplines, thus intersecting with both philosophy andmathematics. Jevons, who developed the marginal utility theory in 1871 to708 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsdisplace the dominant labor theory of value, was part of the network ofmathematician-logicians preceding Russell. The shift in organizational base ofthese networks in the 1870s was responsible for the revolution in economicmethod. Economics had long existed as a practical discipline in connectionwith political doctrines and movements. Jevons promoted a paradigm revolutionas the field became academicized and de-politicized; economics found itsslot in the universities as a broadening of the contents of moral philosophy,hybridized with mathematics. Jevons got his chair at Manchester (1866) inlogic and political economy a few years before his development of marginalutility; as a pupil of the mathematical networks, he colonized the field formathematical methods. Sidgwick, too, like most other Utilitarians, also wroteon economics. His lineage would extend into the following generation withboth G. E. Moore and Keynes.The Logicism of Russell and WittgensteinAt Cambridge after the university reform, there occurred a confluence of allthe major trends of British intellectual life: the algebraist-logicians; the Utilitarians;but also the Idealists, under whose auspices the newly reformed universitiespassed from religious to secular control. Russell epitomizes the resultingtransformation, for he was involved in every aspect of these networks. Histeachers (Ward, Stout) and early friends (McTaggart, Moore) were Idealists,but there were also Utilitarian connections.16 On the algebra–mathematicallogicalside, Russell not only inherited the Cambridge tradition but was alsoan aggressive internationalist, attending the new mathematical congresses ledby Cantor and Hilbert and importing the latest techniques. These he promotedas solutions to long-standing puzzles that Idealists had used for mystifyingscience. Here Russell continued the tradition of British reformers who had beentouting German advances ever since the Humboldtian revolution. Russell wasa central figure in a group which carried off several revolutions at once. Wetake up first the mathematical-logical strand and its conjuncture with theanti-Idealist break; later we will return to the post-Utilitarian movement andordinary language philosophy, which emerged out of this same network matrixand indeed in the same circle of friends.In the late 1890s Cayley’s pupil Whitehead extended the British algebraictradition into a generalized treatment of logic.17 His pupil Russell, in turn,writing in 1897 on the foundations of geometry, classified the various nonstandardgeometries around their axiomatic properties. In 1903 Russell’s Principlesof Mathematics took on the even more ambitious task of founding allof mathematics and physics upon a small number of concepts of symbolic logic.It brought together the logic of classes, Dedekind’s and Cantor’s theories ofThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 709numbers, the infinitesimal calculus, and the branches of geometry. Russell wasimporting a German mathematical movement to Britain; his work followed upFelix Klein’s Erlangen program to unify geometry, and Hilbert’s still broaderprogram of axiomatic unification. In the process, Russell independently createdmuch the same logic of sets as Frege. This is no surprise; both of them werein the same faction in the mathematical foundations conflict, allied withCantor. The two branches of the movement toward axiomatization—the routethrough rigorization of analysis and geometry on the Continent and the routethrough elementary algebra in Britain—now converged.Just as W. R. Hamilton had gotten credit for quaternions while Grassmanwas relatively ignored in Germany, Russell reaped the initial fame while Fregelanguished. This happened because algebra and elementary arithmetic weremuch more central in British mathematical interests than they were on theContinent, where the main action was in the more elaborately developed“advanced” fields. Peirce, who paralleled Frege during the 1870s in developingFIGURE 13.2. BRITISH PHILOSOPHERS AND MATHEMATICIANS,1800–1935: UNIVERSITY REFORM, IDEALIST MOVEMENT,TRINITY-BLOOMSBURY CIRCLE710 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsa new, highly generalized logic, branched off from the British mathematicaltradition of investigating alternative algebras; Peirce too attracted little attentionat the time. The coincidence of three efforts in basic logic—Frege’s,Peirce’s, and Russell’s—indicates that the move was available to be made byextending current lines. Only after 1900, when the mathematical foundationscontroversy attracted general attention in philosophy, did interest in a newlogic crystallize in the attention space.Why should a highly technical area of mathematics spill over into philoso-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 711phy? We find it happening across the board in the generation of 1900: Husserl,Russell, later the Vienna Circle. Mathematical logic was a meta-territoryarising from the confluence of axiomatic programs in algebra, in geometry, andin the arithmetization of analysis. Having been formulated on an appropriatelygeneral level, it rose above mathematics like a balloon slipping its mooringsand floating away. Although it arose out of disputes over the techniques ofmathematical construction and proof, the axiomatic programs become unnecessaryfor mathematicians’ ordinary work of discovering and proving algorithms;it became a goal displacement of the sort familiar in the sociology oforganizations, an end in itself pursued by its own specialized community. Soondisputes and factions among meta-mathematicians were generating their owndynamics, no longer dependent on stimulation from ordinary mathematicalwork. Meta-mathematics now converged with philosophical turf, and thuswith the community of philosophers. For philosophy is precisely the attentionspace of most generalized issues; the episode of meta-mathematics recapitulatesthe way philosophies have emerged throughout history, as the disputesof substantive areas (nature cosmologies of the early Greeks, salvation techniquesin India, theological training for Christians) take on an attention focusof their own.In this case logic got a tremendous boost in attention when it shifted froma technical concern within mathematics to an activity of philosophers. Forphilosophers occupy the space where claims are made about knowledge ingeneral, and thus about the general-purpose role of all intellectuals; majorcontroversies on this turf are hard to ignore. It was for this reason thatmathematicians hostile to philosophy, such as Russell and Wittgenstein, endedup as philosophers, that is, in the attention space where they were mostsuccessful and where they could avoid the fate of Frege and the early Peirce.The explicit emergence of meta-mathematics and of the logicist movementwithin philosophy occurred in a few years at the turn of the century. Russellwas the shock center from which emanated the second wave of the mathematicalfoundations crisis, stimulating the competing programs of Hilbert’s formalism(1904) and Brouwer’s intuitionism (1907). Already in exchanges startingin 1897 and continuing through 1906 (Coffa, 1991: 129–133), the mathematicianPoincaré had taken issue with Russell’s approach, raising objections inthe direction that would become intuitionism. Russell soon managed to escalatethe crisis. In an appendix to Principles of Mathematics (1903), Russell drawsattention to Frege’s logic and points out a contradiction in the notion of setswhich are not members of themselves. (Is this set a member of itself? If yes,no; if no, yes.) Since Frege’s extensional logic depends on translating allpredicates (i.e., concepts or intentions) into sets, and thus on forming sets ofelements of any kind whatever, Russell’s paradox was a blow at the heart of712 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthe entire system. This was no isolated incident; within a year, Zermelo madea sensation with his proof of a more generalized paradox.18 Zermelo’s axiomof choice set off much criticism by mathematicians, especially helping toprovoke the formation of the opposing intuitionists, including once again theanti-logicist Poincaré.Paradoxes and controversy do not derail logicism but launch it. AlthoughFrege, emotionally exhausted by lack of support, declared the bankruptcy ofhis set theory approach, Russell forged ahead immediately to re-ground theprogram on a theory of types. There is an ontological hierarchy of individuals,sets, sets of sets, and so on; statements about membership in sets are meaningfulonly between adjacent levels (Wedberg, 1984: 134–135). Far fromabjuring The Principles of Mathematics, Russell developed its sketch into afully formalized system. He enlisted his old mathematics teacher, and by 1910he and Whitehead in Principia Mathematica had derived in detail a portion ofelementary arithmetic going considerably further than Frege. Logicians weremore interested in the Principia than were mathematicians. A full-scale movementof logicist philosophers was springing up; and their favorite topics, ina well-worn pattern of intellectual life, were connected not with extendingRussell’s method along the path he had marked, but with re-digging thefoundations at just the points where he indicated there was trouble. The logicistprogram claimed to build mathematics from the simplest possible startingpoint, reducing assumptions to the most unassailable and obvious premises.But the theory of types, like Zermelo’s axiom of choice, was neither obviousnor simple. Replacing such devices became the central puzzle around whichboth meta-mathematics and logical formalist philosophies grew.As Russell came into his own wielding the weapons of logicism, his stancetoward philosophy was that it is a history of conceptual mistakes. Hazymetaphysical systems can be cleared away by using the tools which had workedso well in mathematics, just as Dedekind had cleared up Zeno’s paradoxes ofmotion and modern rigor had given the final answer to Berkeley’s objectionsto the calculus. Unlike the German mathematicians, who generally had noanimus against philosophy, Russell took this militant stance because he wassimultaneously engaged in two battles: for set theory in mathematics andagainst Idealism in philosophy. Idealism, as we have seen, was everywhere thephilosophy of the transition from the old religious university to secularism. InGermany the transition was two generations past, but in England it had takenplace in the generation of Russell’s teachers. Russell himself along with hisfriends was an Idealist into the 1890s. Russell’s break with Idealism wasespecially pointed because Idealists too tended to take logic as their turf. Bearin mind that logic, before the revolution worked by Frege and Russell, waswidely considered an ancient and stagnant field, a soft territory tempting in-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 713vasion by new philosophical methods. Thus Hegel could couch his dialecticalmetaphysics in the form of a logic; and in Russell’s generation, Bosanquet(1888) and McTaggart (1910) continued to produce systems of Idealist logic.The most famous logic was that of Bradley (1883), in which he used acritique of Mill’s inductivism as stepping-stone to his Idealist system of 1893.Bradley’s key argument (as we saw in Chapter 12) held that relations areillegitimate abstractions from an inexpressible Reality, as revealed by an infiniteregress of relations which attach relations to their terms. Russell counterattackedaccordingly. Bradley had assumed that relations are internal, constitutiveof the objects that are related. The absurd consequences of this doctrine(including the mind-dependence of all objects) can be avoided by recognizingthat relations are external; items that are related exist in their own right,unaffected by their relations with anything else. Russell’s logical atomismdirectly opposed Bradley’s Idealism.Russell proposed a logically perfect language to overcome the mystificationsof surface grammar in the subject-predicate form. All descriptive terms are tobe replaced by logically proper names which simply designate. To use anun-Russellian example: “the son of God” is merely a circumlocution whichcan be replaced by “Jesus.” For Bradley, who recognized no brute particularfacts, it was the opposite: “Jesus” is above all “the son of God” and not viceversa. In Russell’s reductionist program, all indirect, descriptive statements canbe translated into statements about logically proper names, referring to thingsthat one knows by acquaintance. Truth or falsity can be read off directly.19As the controversy over meta-mathematics moved increasingly towardphilosophical turf, Russell’s own attention shifted to the larger consequencesof his logical atomism. The basis of his influence was not so much the seriesof systems which Russell tried out during his lifetime as the direction he gaveto subsequent philosophy. In fact the publication of Principia Mathematicaposed a personal crisis for Russell; for all the investment of effort in threedetailed volumes of formal derivations, the greatest attention was attracted tothe ground-level flaws of the theory of types. At just this point Wittgensteinappeared at Cambridge and was adopted by Russell as the disciple to carry onhis method and remedy its flaws (Monk, 1990: 36–65). Wittgenstein wasundoubtedly an individual of high intelligence and powers of concentration;what alone was unique, however, and what fitted him for the role of iconoclasticgenius, were the opportunities presented as he was welcomed into thecore of the intellectual network at this challenging moment.Wittgenstein saw that the method of a logically perfect language could becut loose from mathematics—where Russell’s trajectory had encountered adead end—and generalized to all of philosophy. During 1912–1916, Wittgensteinreworked and radicalized Russell’s ingredients. Wittgenstein postulates714 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathssimple elements or objects—in effect, those designated by Russell’s logicallyproper names—as the ultimate constituents of the world. Facts are combinationsof objects into states of affairs; all meaningful statements allegedly canbe translated into propositions about these, and the totality of elementarysentences would give complete knowledge of the world. Objects have purelyinternal properties; they are unaffected by one another, and contain all possibilitiesof entering into combinations. This logical atomism continues Russell’strajectory against Bradley’s holism. Each state of affairs is independent of allothers, and no inferences are possible from one to another. Wittgenstein givesno examples of simple things in the Tractatus; in his notebooks of 1914–1916,he wonders whether they might be like points of light or the particles of atomicphysics (Wedberg, 1984: 166)—much in the same way that Russell vacillatedas to the nature of his reals. In effect they are Wittgenstein’s effort to postulatewhat the world is like before or “below” the making of propositions about it.The simples are not merely the ground level of an empirical reduction; theyare possibilities in logical space out of which all combinations can be generated,beyond the changing configurations of mere experience.Although Wittgenstein’s system has the flavor of reductionism, it is anontological hierarchy. The place of logic in the system is empty but neverthelesscentral. The new Fregean method of logic is the key ingredient which Wittgensteinhad inherited, and it cuts in a different direction than the program ofreduction to ultimate simples. Wittgenstein expresses this conflict by displayinglogic as deriving from tautologies (in the case of logical truths) and contradictions(in the case of falsities). True logical propositions are known without ourknowing the truth of their components; “it is raining or it is not raining” istrue, regardless of the facts. Wittgenstein’s technical contribution in logic wasto work out a method of truth tables, based on the work of Russell’s friendSheffer at Harvard, to show which combinations of propositions are tautologies,contradictions, or contingent statements about facts.Wittgenstein’s most famous move occurs at the place where he criticizesRussell’s tradition, and where he locates the deepest troubles for future philosophersto work on. This is the distinction between what is sayable and whatcan only be shown. One meaning of the unsayable is that the ultimate ontologyis arbitrary, a brute reality that cannot be further explained. Unsayability isfound on several levels. Absolutely simple objects, the ultimate constituents ofthe world, cannot be described, a claim already implicit in Russell’s knowledgeby acquaintance. Wittgenstein expands knowledge by acquaintance to everylevel of his ontology. At the level of propositions, what is displayed is the logicalform of reality, a picture corresponding in the arrangement of its parts to thearrangement of states of affairs in the world. Wittgenstein asserts somethinglike an overarching Platonic realm of logical form, that which propositionsThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 715“must have in common with reality in order to be able to represent it.” Thisform is shown but it is not said in the proposition; in order to do so “weshould have to be able to station ourselves with propositions somewhereoutside logic, that is to say outside the world” (Tractatus 4.12).Similarly, in discussing Frege’s technique of functions and their contents,the fundamental break from the subject-predicate logic, Wittgenstein points toa category of formal concepts beyond those discerned by Frege. These are notrepresented or said by the function but are shown by the kind of sign beingused: name signifiers for objects, number signs for numbers, operation signsfor operations, and so on (Tractatus 4.126–4.1272). In effect this is a generalizationof Frege’s founding of the number system on cardinal numbers,Platonic essences of numbers which are beyond the ordinal numbers of empiricalcounting. The most innovative part of Wittgenstein’s version is thatPlatonic forms are no longer taken as the highest species of the rationallyintelligible; quite the opposite, they are what is unsayable. With the weaponof the unsayable/showable, Wittgenstein is able to defend still further realms,the higher reality of ethics and mystical religion, unaffectable by anything thatcan be said on the merely verbal level.Wittgenstein’s distinction between saying and showing crystallizes fromseveral aspects of Frege and Russell’s work: Platonism, knowledge by acquaintance,and the difficulties of the theory of types. Saying/showing is supposedto obviate the theory of types. Actually it grows out of it, a reformulation andextension of the basic thrust of Frege and Russell in exploring the relationsamong hierarchical levels in propositions. Wittgenstein declares that the theoryof types is unnecessary to avoid paradox because the different kinds of symbolsused in a logical language directly show that various kinds of realms are to betreated differently and cannot be mixed. Implicitly, one knows that the kindof thing symbolized by “a” or “b” plays a different role from those symbolizedby “x,” “y,” “z.” The source of Wittgenstein’s discovery of the saying/showingdistinction is his explicit investigation of the way symbols do their work(Monk, 1990: 92; Tractatus 4.0312–4.0411). He resists the habit of seeingsymbols as purely conventional, which had blinded previous logicians fromseeing how symbols are chosen through their success or failure in expressingvarious things.20Frege and Russell had developed logic symbols in the course of developingtheir programs; now Wittgenstein turned the technique of meta-attention,which he had learned from his predecessors, on what they were doing. Wittgenstein’smove was like breaking a gestalt frame, since it is virtually impossibleto see the structures of symbol use while we are wielding them for somepurpose. This is why Wittgenstein had such an intense and painful struggle torealize what could be done next, and to express in words an insight about716 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswhat can and cannot be said in preexisting language.21 Wittgenstein had hisown blind spot. He did not prevent subsequent philosophers from investigatingthe new meta-levels he had opened; by pointing to them, he opened thepossibility of creating new language for this terrain. Wittgenstein did not seethis because he was involved in a polemic, launched already by Russell in thecampaign against Idealism. The distinction between the sayable and the unsayable/showable not only indicates the hierarchy of statements but legislateswhat is legitimate and illegitimate at each level.22 The sayable/unsayable distinctioncarries on the polemical utility of the theory of types. And indeed thelatter did not fade away; even if he regarded it as overly complicated for thefundamentals of mathematics, Carnap found it a powerful weapon to wieldagainst metaphysics, which could now be eliminated as resting on categorymistakes.In the Tractatus, Wittgenstein supplemented his Russellian heritage withreflections in a very different tone on the meaning of life and the paramountimportance of religious mysticism, coupled into his system via the doctrine ofunsayables. This portion was added during the stress of combat in World WarI, when Wittgenstein underwent a religious conversion to Tolstoyan Christianity(Monk, 1990: 115–123, 134–146). This segment was not generated by thecore philosophical network; not surprisingly, it had little influence and receivedvirtually no recognition when Wittgenstein later gravitated back into thephilosophical network, especially in the Vienna Circle, which was interestedonly in the Russellian logicist line. Rereading the Tractatus in a religious-mysticallight came only after Wittgenstein’s death, after he had become the starof the ordinary language movement, above all during the post-positivism ofthe 1970s.The Vienna Circle as a Nexus of StrugglesThe period between 1910 and 1940 witnesses a massive realignment. Theentire lineup of the preceding generations fades out: Idealists, Neo-Kantians,Brentano’s act psychology (so-called Austrian realism), as well as vitalists,evolutionists, Utilitarians, and materialists. Representatives of some of theseschools continue to publish, but they are in their last gasps, regarded asoutdated and receiving declining attention. In their place come new schools:logical positivists, ordinary language philosophers, and phenomenologist-existentialists.These constitute new lines of antagonism, rising to new heights ofmilitancy.Not that there is a break in the intergenerational networks: many of theold lineages continue, but the latest pupils move in new directions (see Figure13.3). In England, the old Idealist and Utilitarian networks give rise to RussellThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 717and Moore. In Germany, Brentano is upstaged by Husserl, and he in turn byHeidegger; another branch of Brentano’s succession, through Twardowski andhis pupils in the Warsaw-Lvov school, leads on to Tarski. The Neo-Kantianstoo are breaking apart; Husserl had been a student at Marburg as well asVienna; Rickert was the teacher of both Carnap and Heidegger, the latter twofratricidal network brothers; and it is a shock to see that, via Husserl, Heidegger’sgrandteacher was the mathematician Weierstrass. As usual, intellectualenergy is propagated down the wires of interpersonal contacts, while thecontent of ideas is rearranged by horizontal strains of opposition reconfiguringthe attention space.Realignment happened more or less simultaneously in each country. InEngland and the United States, this period was the end of Idealism. The lastsystems—those of McTaggart, Stout, Whitehead, Peirce, Royce—lingered intothe 1910s and 1920s but had an end-of-the-line quality. Pragmatism, too, asa transition away from Idealism, flourished at the turn of the century, thenfaded away by the 1930s before the logical positivists and ordinary languagephilosophers. This pattern suggests that an underlying cause of realignmentwas the completion of religious secularization in the universities. But this doesnot explain why there was a simultaneous realignment in Germany, whereFIGURE 13.3. REALIGNMENT OF THE NETWORKS IN THEGENERATION OF 1900718 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathssecularization had long since taken place. France, whose academic organizationdiffered most from the German model adopted elsewhere, was least coordinatedwith the contents of realigning movements in other countries. Neither alogical positivist nor an ordinary language movement developed in France;when realignment came in the late 1920s and the 1930s, spiritualism andvitalism were replaced by phenomenology and existentialism imported fromGermany.At the cost of some chronological backtracking, we will trace each of thethree main movements: first the logical positivists, whose flagship was theVienna Circle; then the ordinary language movement, which originated inBritish networks simultaneously with Russell’s logicist movement and claimedWittgenstein as apostate from one movement to the other. Finally we returnto the German side to pick up the parallel development originating in thenetworks of mathematicians and of Neo-Kantians that became phenomenologyand eventually existentialism. The two big German movements, starting frommuch the same roots, reorganized the intellectual field around new conflictsand grew steadily more opposed. In the process the older Neo-Kantianismwhich dominated philosophy during the period of disciplinary differentiation,was displaced from the center of the attention space.The Vienna Circle is an amalgam of three ancestral networks: Neo-Kantians, physicist-positivists, and mathematician-logicians of the foundationsstruggle.23 In the personal intersection of these networks and the super-concentrationof the oppositions going on both within and among each group, wefind the source of the creative energy of the Vienna Circle (see Figure 13.4).When logical positivists superseded Neo-Kantians, they broke up a modusvivendi among scientists and philosophers going back to Helmholtz in the1850s. The laws of mathematical science had long been defended by Cohen’sMarburg school. The interpretation by Cohen’s pupil Cassirer of the newphenomenalistic physics was widely regarded as preserving objectivity betterthan Mach’s extremism, and as providing the best philosophical interpretationof Einsteinian relativity theory. Cassirer in 1910 held influentially that matter,substance, and force have no ontological reality; the subject of science is merephenomenological description, structured by theoretical statements of functionalconnections. At virtually the same time, Vaihinger became famous forhis Philosophy of As-If (1911), stating that we operate on the basis of necessaryfictions taken as if they were true.24 Schlick and Reichenbach, too, were avowedKantians up to the early 1920s, as were Carnap and Popper still later.Neo-Kantianism was changing, but creative developments normally serveto keep a school alive. Why then did this one die? Cassirer read the lesson ofrelativity physics as showing that the particularities of Euclidean geometrycould not be taken as a priori; there was a development of the categories thatThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 719filter experience. Suddenly the atmosphere turned unsympathetic. Instead ofallowing Neo-Kantians to broaden their stance, Schlick began to invoke a morerigorous standard. The narrower interpretation of the Kantian categories hadbeen proved wrong, while Cassirer’s wider interpretation could not be allowedbecause Neo-Kantianism’s adaptability showed it to be a slippery, unscientificphilosophy, unfalsifiable by experience. New rules of the game were imposed:previously it would not have been expected that a philosophy, especially oneconcerned with the grounds of experience, should be testable in the same wayas a research science.25Historical comparisons show that a school can find intellectual resourcesto defend itself indefinitely against criticism; it is never external criticism alonethat kills a position.26 Neo-Kantianism ceased being a vital contender for thecenter of attention; even those who owed much to it now turned against it.There are other signs of the loss of identification among the Neo-Kantiansthemselves: Natorp after 1910 abandoned the logical foundations of exactscience for a metaphysics approaching Platonic religious mysticism; Cohen’sstudent Nicolai Hartmann in the 1920s reversed the Neo-Kantian priority ofepistemology over ontology; others became existentialists. The same thinghappened with Brentano’s school: despite the attention Meinong got around1904, later pupils preferred to style themselves phenomenologists or logicians.The law of small numbers was operating: as new movements discoveredresources to wield in the attention space, there was an accelerating rush to takeFIGURE 13.4. NEO-KANTIANS AND THE VIENNA CIRCLE720 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsup the most energizing issues; older positions were squeezed out, not becausethey were no longer viable but because there was not room to maintain thehalf dozen older factions along with three or four new ones. Neo-Kantianismwas especially vulnerable because, as the dominant German school of the pasttwo generations, it had crowded the attention space with a variety of sub-positions.The Neo-Kantians had decentralized themselves in presiding over disciplinarydifferentiation, creating meta-topics out of questions of boundaryadjudication. In an opposite spirit were Carnap’s and Neurath’s reductionistprograms for the unification of science. Their physics-centered imperialism wastransitory, but the gesture indicated a deeper thrust of the movement: towarda radical simplification of the attention space.The Spillover of Physicists’ Methodological DisputesThe impulse to criticize philosophy is not inherent in physics. The mainprevious episode of scientists’ attack had been directed against the interferenceof Naturphilosophie, and had subsided when academic autonomy was obtained;the militant materialists of Büchner’s generation had acquired no prestigeamong philosophers, much less provoking a reform of philosophy fromwithin such as characterized the twentieth-century analytical schools. On thecontrary, Neo-Kantian philosophers quickly seized on the contradiction thatanti-metaphysical materialists were themselves promoting an uncritical metaphysicsof matter, a critique in which they were joined within science byMachian phenomenalism. Positivism and Neo-Kantianism were fairly close,especially in the 1870s and 1880s, in their rejection of materialism; Cassirer’sphilosophy of physics in 1910 was close to Mach’s. And until 1920 Schlickwas arguing for the compatibility of Neo-Kantianism with the phenomenalismof Mach and Avenarius. How then did smaller points of difference overpost-materialist physics grow into a gulf?What would become the modern positivist movement started as an internaldevelopment among physicists, laying down methodological rules for their owndiscipline rather than legislating generally as to the scope of knowledge or thepractice of philosophy. From the 1870s onward, experimenters in electromagnetism,light, and radiation formulated mathematical models which dispensedwith depicting the mechanics of physical bodies. A radical movement of physicistsled by Kirchhoff and Mach began to argue that concepts such as “mass,”“force,” and “atom” are merely convenient fictions for simplifying observations.Mach dismissed theoretical constructs as needless multiplication of metaphysicalentities, even rejecting the existence of natural laws. Ostwald’s vitalist“energetics” joined forces with the positivists, holding that atoms and mattercan be ruled out by the principle of the economy of thought. On the other side,The Post-revolutionary Condition • 721theoretical physicists worked to preserve the centrality of mechanical laws ofbodies, a paradigm which had led to so many past advances into new researchareas by introducing strategic modifications. The most successful of these wasPlanck, whose quantum theory in 1900 abandoned classical dynamics inpostulating abrupt changes in energy levels; on this basis Einstein’s specialrelativity in 1905 explained anomalous features of light, and Bohr in 1913developed a theory of atomic structure.Heated debates took place between the camps (Lindenfeld, 1980: 80–86,105–110; Johnston, 1972: 181–8; EP, 1967: 7:15). Planck and Boltzmann,whose statistical mechanics provided the basis for Planck’s defense of atomism,disputed repeatedly with Ostwald and Mach during 1895–1905. Neo-Kantiansjoined the battle, pointing out that Mach’s extreme inductivism was unable toaccount for the theoretical aspects of science, its ability to predict the future,and its mathematical laws. Mach in turn rejected the a priori character ofnumber, holding that the integers arose from the practical needs of calculation.Mach acquired a reputation as a naturalistic extremist by arguing that thesimplest unification of the science occurs under the auspices of physiology:sensations in the nervous system are the only reality, and economy of thoughtis itself an adaptation of the organism to its environment. This reduction tophysiological psychology raised echoes of the Neo-Kantian debates of the1860s and 1870s over the physiological interpretation of the a priori categories,and gave energy to the renewed rejection of psychologism and the defenseof objectivity in mathematics by Frege and Husserl. Planck from 1908 throughthe 1920s defended a version of Kantianism against Mach’s reduction of realityto a flow of sensations; like Cassirer and the Neo-Kantians, Planck regardedMach’s position as relativistic subjectivism. These debates were a dress rehearsalfor the Vienna Circle’s campaign to drive metaphysics off the stage. So farit was a struggle over what is legitimate within physics; later it became aquestion of what is legitimate in any field of reason.That movement began to crystallize during the uproar of public fame aboutEinsteinian relativity theory, following Eddington’s astronomical evidence ofthe bending of light in 1919. In this vein was the publicity which surroundedBohr’s Copenhagen school and Heisenberg’s quantum mechanics with its indeterminacyprinciple, announced in 1925. Philosophy was not simply respondingto new discoveries in physics, however; similar problems had existedsince Einstein’s special theory of relativity in 1905, and even earlier, withoutupsetting the dominance of Neo-Kantian interpretations over Machian phenomenalism.Although verification was exemplified for both Schlick and Popperby the relativity verification, it was not the only interpretation. Eddingtonhimself, the experimental verifier, hardly took it as grounds for rejectingmetaphysics or for demarcating true science from pseudo-science, and even722 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsadopted a Neo-Kantian stance (Passmore, 1968: 333). The popular pronouncementsof relativity physicists such as Eddington and Jeans in the 1920s and1930s, like those of Einstein, continued a tradition of reconciling physics withreligion. The physics of the 1920s did not create the themes of the ViennaCircle, although by giving greater attention to the philosophy of science, ithelped make them famous.The Vienna Circle grew directly from the network of the leading Germanphysicists (see Figure 13.5). Kirchhoff, Helmholtz, Planck, Boltzmann, andEinstein were their teachers or grandteachers. Institutionally too these physicistscreated the arena in which the struggle would be carried on. The chair ofHistory and Theory of Inductive Sciences, crossing over from physics tophilosophy, was established in 1895 to lure Mach to Vienna. The secondincumbent was Boltzmann (1902–1906), who used the chair to sponsor publicdebates against the Machians; the third was Schlick, who arrived in Vienna in1922 in the wake of his attack on Cassirer. It is the focus of arguments thatcounts, not the inheritance of positions; Schlick began as Planck’s student, eventhough he eventually switched to the Machian side. The allied group at Berlinformed around Reichenbach, an Einstein protégé working on the mathematicalphilosophy of space-time relativity (EP, 1967: 11:355–356). Additional networkingredients besides physics resulted in the distinctiveness of the ViennaCircle. The Machians were not concerned with the foundations of mathematicsFIGURE 13.5. PHYSICISTS’ METHODOLOGICAL CONTROVERSIESThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 723or the reform of logic; it was Carnap and Wittgenstein who brought these intothe center of attention at Vienna. The central members of the Vienna Circlewere network hybrids of physicists and mathematicians who also had hadNeo-Kantian teachers.Physicists were emboldened that they had something attention-getting tosay in the central territory of philosophy. Soon they launched into an attackon the dominant school, neo-Kantianism itself. In the process they found itconvenient to wave the banner of Mach. When the Vienna Circle formalizedin 1928, it called itself the Ernst Mach Society. This was to a certain extentrhetorical. The methods of the Vienna Circle, especially their logical tools, werenot those of Mach and his psychological reductionism; and the physicalism ofthe 1930s was far from Mach’s neutral monism. Phenomenalism was onetheme among many explored by the circle. It was above all Mach’s militancythat they invoked, now widened to exclude metaphysics not only from physicsbut from everywhere.The first vehicle of this militancy was verification, a concept alreadylaunched by Schlick in pre-Circle days, in 1918, before he became a positivist.As Carnap, Wittgenstein, and others joined in, more resources were broughtto bear on how scientific knowledge is constituted and how it differs from theforms of non-knowledge that are to be excluded. This proved to be a fruitfulvein of puzzles, as each solution gave rise to new difficulties. Empirical verificationfoundered on questions about the nature of ultimate verifiers and thestatus of the principle of verifiability itself. Russellian logicism provided acriterion for rejecting some forms of expression as not merely false but meaningless;Schlick and Waismann shifted to meaningfulness as the demarcationbetween science and non-science. This in turn raised the question of themeaningfulness of the language in which the criterion itself was formulated.Popper eventually carried this internal conflict into a rejection of the verificationprogram while continuing the demarcationist spirit that was the core ofthe Vienna Circle.Rival Networks of MathematicalFoundations and the Genesis of Gödel’s ProofThe 1920s were also the height of conflict over mathematical foundations, themost active period for pronouncements by Brouwer, Hilbert, and their supporters.Alongside them remained a third (and indeed the oldest) faction, theRussell-Frege logicists, whose stronghold in the 1920s had become the ViennaCircle. Their conflicts became superimposed on those of the physicist-philosopherswho first constituted the Circle, building to a grand intensity of creativestruggle in the years around 1930.724 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe Frege-Russell line was represented by Carnap, who came to Viennain 1926, and Wittgenstein, who began discussions with the Circle soon after(see Figure 13.6). Both had had formative contact with Frege early in theircareers: Carnap had been a pupil at Jena during 1910–1914, and Wittgensteinvisited Frege for early advice on his intellectual path in 1911 and again in1912; thereafter Frege steadily encouraged Wittgenstein by correspondencewhile he was writing the Tractatus during the First World War (Monk, 1990:36, 70, 115–157). Frege, who had gone without significant professional offspringall his life, suddenly acquired two. Both were strongly affected byRussell. Wittgenstein was Russell’s personal disciple, anointed to carry out thelogicist program. Carnap was galvanized into action in 1921 upon readingRussell’s programmatic appeal for a movement of philosophers trained inscience and resistant to misleading literary methods, which Carnap took—naturally enough as a Frege protégé—as directed at him personally (Coffa,1991: 208). He entered into correspondence with Russell, and began to buildthe foundations of knowledge on a Russell-like perfect language hierarchizedthrough the theory of types. Although Wittgenstein had already gone beyondthe theory of types with devices of his own, there remained enough sense ofcommonality that in the late 1920s, Wittgenstein suspected Carnap of stealinghis ideas and excluded him from his own personal meetings with the ViennaCircle (Coffa, 1991: 405). They are network stepbrothers, working out of thesame patrimony, and thus rivals in the attention space.The Hilbert lineage is represented in the Vienna Circle network by severalformer pupils, including the mathematics professor Hans Hahn, who hadoriginally brought Schlick to Vienna and was a main organizer of the Circle(DSB, 1981: 14:88–92, 281–285; Wang, 1987: 52–57, 76–88). Gödel wasHahn’s protégé; Hahn also taught Popper, who entered the periphery of theCircle in the same year that Gödel announced his famous proof. In the 1920sthe Hilbert school made strenuous efforts to prove the consistency of arithmetic;among the most active was Reichenbach’s colleague at Berlin during1927–1929, von Neumann, who worked on a new axiomatization soon pickedup by Gödel. The opposite camp, the Brouwer intuitionists headquartered atAmsterdam, also became entwined with the Vienna network and its issues.Hermann Weyl, who, like Reichenbach, had studied with Hilbert at Göttingen,had in the 1920s shifted to the Brouwer camp, mixing intuitionist and formalistmethods in the attempt to reconstruct mathematics from the intuitionist side.These same mathematicians were intensely active at this time in the foundationsof the new physics of relativity and quantum mechanics, overlapping with thecentral preoccupations of the physicists in the Vienna Circle. Further overlapoccurred when Karl Menger, one of Hahn’s favorite pupils, went to study withBrouwer in 1925–1927 before returning to Vienna, where he joined the circleThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 725FIGURE 13.6. NETWORK OF MATHEMATICALLOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS726 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsand was especially close to Gödel. It was with some sense of showdown thatBrouwer was invited to lecture at Vienna in March 1928. Wittgenstein suddenlyended his long intellectual withdrawal and began talking about philosophyagain immediately after hearing Brouwer’s lectures, although he at firsthad to be coaxed by his Vienna Circle acquaintances to attend (Wang, 1987:81; Monk, 1990: 249). That summer Hilbert, in a celebrated address to theInternational Congress of Mathematicians, challenged the field to solve fourbasic problems of the consistency and completeness of analysis, number theory,and logic. Gödel immediately chose these problems for his dissertation; by1930 he had solved them all.The conflicting philosophical schools also became tied to the mathematicalfoundations battle. Husserl was invoked by the intuitionists, especially as hemoved in the 1920s to emphasize the pre-formalized life-world, within whichgeometry was seen to originate (Heyting, 1983; Coffa, 1991: 253–255). Thegrowing sense of antagonism between phenomenologists and logical positivistsbecame overlaid upon the rivalry between the mathematical camps. Tarski,who like Husserl was descended from the Brentano school, adopted fromHusserl a hierarchy of semantic categories, which played the same role asRussell’s theory of types but in a more guarded fashion by generalizing fromlogic to languages. Tarski visited the Vienna mathematics department duringFebruary 1930, with a galvanizing effect on Carnap.Even more of a Trojan horse was Wittgenstein. Originally the heir apparentto the Frege-Russell program, by 1930 he was explicitly turning away in adirection that increasingly resembled that of the mathematical intuitionists. Hisstrong personal influence led to a growing split within the Circle. In 1930Gödel was challenging Wittgenstein in the Circle on philosophical issues: Howdoes one distinguish the allowably meaningless statements which constituteWittgenstein’s own higher-order clarifications from the meaninglessness ofmetaphysics, which it is our business to destroy (Coffa, 1991: 272)? Sooneverything clicked in new directions for philosophers and mathematicians alike.In the summer of 1930 Gödel, not yet 25 years old, conveyed to the Circle hisproof that any logical system capable of generating arithmetic contains propositionsundecidable within the system.The creativity of Gödel and of the later Wittgenstein spun off from muchthe same point, and from their mutual disagreements. This was a clash betweentwo highly sponsored group favorites, an older and a younger. Gödel wassponsored by his mathematical mentors in the Vienna Circle as the brightyoung student capable of solving the most central problems; through them, hisresults were immediately and widely publicized.More fireworks exploded at this moment when the Circle’s conflicts becamemost intense. Within the next year Popper, a peripheral member of the ViennaThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 727Circle network, proclaimed the end of the verification criterion and its replacementby falsification.27 The moment when Popper made his debut was the timewhen Gödel demolished the hopes of Russell-Carnap logicism for providingan unassailable foundation and hence as a possible demarcation criterion.Popper’s ideas no doubt received an immediate and friendly welcome fromsome factions of the Circle because he stepped into a gap. Soon Carnap,Neurath, and Wittgenstein were announcing the abandonment of earlier programsfor major new directions.It is characteristic of creative circles that one innovation spawns another;and major creations must go in different directions, even in oppositions (seeFigure 13.7). Gödel’s undecidability proof was a fundamental defeat for theFrege-Russell logicist program; and it was formulated in the heart of the groupwhere, of all the world, that program was most actively being pursued. Gödel’swork was the result of the network mixture which constituted the ViennaCircle, a case of creativity by superimposed oppositions. In the field of fundamentalissues which is philosophical turf, creativity is tightly focused conflictboring in on problems until deep faults are found; around these reconceptualizationtakes place. In this sense Popper accurately recognized in falsificationsomething central to intellectual life—perhaps not in the actual histories ofscientific discovery, but in the world of the philosophers that surrounded him.The Stimulation of Insoluble PuzzlesEncapsulating the conflicts which had built up in the Vienna Circle, Gödel’smeta-mathematics catalyzed a new round of creativity. Russell’s paradox hadFIGURE 13.7. VIENNA CIRCLE: COMPOSITE NETWORK728 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsbeen not the end of the logicist movement but the beginning of its fame; Gödel’sproof did not destroy but added heat to the fire. It was from this point thatWittgenstein, whatever private misgivings he had held previously about theconsistency of his own approach in the Tractatus, moved increasingly intopublic opposition to his old school—probably not least because his major rivalin the Circle, Carnap, was sticking to the logicist road.Gödel’s proof did not derail latter-day logicists, but gave them new directionsin which to work. Unlike Neo-Kantianism, Carnap’s program was not amovement losing its position in attention space but an energetically expandingone. New and fundamental obstacles could not defeat it, but became grist forits mill.Carnap’s 1928 Der Logische Aufbau der Welt constructed all meaningful(i.e., empirically verifiable) statements out of a Russellian hierarchy: signs forindividuals, classes, classes of classes, supplemented by a sign for empiricalelements. Methodologically the system was solipsistic; it is my individualexperiences which are the foundation. By 1934, under the stimulus of Tarskiand Gödel, Carnap had shifted to the impersonal syntax of a universally validlanguage; the basic elements were now the natural numbers (integers), fromwhich are successively constructed the real numbers and a four-dimensionalspace-time, which is a set of all points with numbered coordinates. In thislanguage all statements of empirical science can be translated into somethinglike “red appears at point (x, y, z, t).” This translation game did not actuallygo beyond sketching the form of descriptive statements, and took for grantedthat mathematical laws existed or would be forthcoming which would explainrecurrent patterns in space-time; in short, it was a philosophical programsailing under the rhetoric of the unification of science. In the 1940s Carnapresponded to criticisms by loosening the system still further, reintroducinghigher-order concepts which he had previously rejected as meaninglessly metaphysical.By now he was dividing the language of science into an empiricalobservational language plus a theoretical language or formal calculus fordeducing connections (Wedberg, 1984: 207–229). This formalism in turnprovided the target for radical revisions by Quine and others.Carnap’s shift to the language of physics broke away from the olderphenomenalism supported by Schlick, toward Neurath’s rival camp. The ViennaCircle was splitting in not just two but three main directions: Schlick’sold program, now reduced to following the lead of Wittgenstein—what Neurathcalled the “right wing”—plus Carnap’s continuing development of logicism,and a “left wing” led by Neurath. Wittgenstein moved increasinglytoward becoming a rallying-point for outright opposition to logical positivism;abandoning his older logicism to Carnap, he shifted abruptly towardGödel’s position and even surpassed him in extending the radicalness of itsimplications for philosophy. The action which kept the loyalists of the ViennaThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 729Circle alive shifted to points at issue between the programs of Carnap andNeurath.For Neurath, science can be sufficiently demarcated from meaninglessphilosophies by the program of the unification of science, with Carnap-likeprotocol sentences at the core and the laws of physics as connections. Undisturbedby the critiques of Popper and Gödel, Neurath jettisoned the search fora verification principle; science does not start from absolute foundations butrebuilds constantly, like a ship being repaired while sailing on the open sea.Even observational sentences are revisable, and all beliefs are fallible (Coffa,1991: 363). After Neurath died in 1945, Quine inherited Neurath’s slot withinthe array of oppositions of the late Vienna Circle. Quine was Carnap’s longtimecorrespondent, but reputations are made by disagreement, and Quine madehis by pushing onward to surprising consequences for the formalist program:the endless adjustability of languages to avoid falsification on particular empiricalpoints, the indeterminacy of exact translation among languages, andeven denial of the distinction between empirical and logical-analytic propositions.The first two of these points were paralleled a generation later by Kuhn’stheory of conservative scientific paradigms and their incommensurability.Yet a further legacy of the Vienna Circle to the post-positivist philosophyof the next generation was to come. Neurath had always been the organizationalmover of the Vienna Circle; in the 1930s, as the group began to emigrateunder the Nazi threat, Neurath transferred most of their publication effortsfrom Erkenntnis into the Encyclopedia of Unified Science. Eventually he transplantedthis to the United States, where he joined forces with Charles Morris,and thus with the pragmatist lineage of Peirce and Mead. The last notable actof the Encyclopedia, and hence of the Vienna Circle’s organizational core, wasto commission Thomas Kuhn, a physicist turned historian, to write The Structureof Scientific Revolutions.28The aftermath shows the fruitfulness of the Vienna Circle’s vein of puzzleseven in the failure of almost every item in its program. The radical consequenceswhich Neurath and Quine turned up could be seized on by anti-formalistsand anti-positivists, just as Kuhn was to become the darling of studentMarxists and deconstructionists. But the underlying thrust of the movementwas in the methods of philosophy rather than its contents. An array of formallogics was created to explore the rich vein of problems; analytical techniquesbecame dominant, above all at American universities, in the midcentury generation.What made the logical positivist movement so effective in capturingphilosophical attention space was not its solutions but the puzzles turned upby its formal methods. The real discovery of the Vienna Circle was the locationof deep problems, and the conundrums of logical formalism were just whatgave them the materials on which to continue their work.730 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe Ordinary Language Reaction against Logical FormalismThe ordinary language school became popular as a reaction against the logicalformalists. In this respect it too was part of the realignment of positions; locallyin England, the scene was the collapse of interest in Idealism, and new positionsexpanded to fill the vacant attention space. Originally, Russell’s mathematicallogicism was only a technical specialty on the periphery of British philosophy.The development of Idealist systems remained a primary interest down to the1920s. Bradley (whose Appearance and Reality appeared in 1893) was reputedthe greatest living philosopher. At Cambridge the leader was McTaggart, whoproduced amplifications of Hegel in 1896, 1901, and 1910, down through hisgreat posthumous system (1927), and along with two other Idealists, Wardand Stout, dominated teaching for the philosophy honors examinations.The opposition consisted in various versions of naturalism. Outside theacademic world, Spencer went on enlarging his evolutionist system downthrough 1899 and sold widely for another decade; inside the universities,experimental psychology was becoming a battleground between naturalisticand spiritualistic approaches. Utilitarianism continued, most famously at thehands of Sidgwick at Cambridge, until his death in 1900. But now there wasconsiderable crossing over among the schools, a sign of the realignment tocome. Sidgwick had founded the Society for Psychic Research; among itsmembers was Arthur Balfour, another Trinity student and Sidgwick’s brotherin-law. Balfour adopted Humean skepticism to undermine anti-religious rationalism,and held (1895) that all beliefs including those regarding nature rest ona climate of traditional opinion. The Utilitarians, once considered outrageouspolitical radicals, had given ground intellectually while gaining connections ofhigh social respectability; Balfour was conservative leader of the House ofCommons in the 1890s and prime minister 1902–1906. On the whole, prestigewas on the side of Idealism as the sophisticated and up-to-date accommodationwith religion.The first major break in this structure of the attention space came in 1903with G. E. Moore’s Principia Ethica. Moore simultaneously criticized all theprominent schools, at least within the restricted grounds of ethical theory.Spencer’s evolutionist ethics and the Utilitarianism of Bentham, Mill, andSidgwick, all fall afoul of the naturalistic fallacy; Idealist systems, too, commita version of the fallacy by identifying the good with an aspect of super-sensiblereality. The good is an indefinable predicate because it is absolutely simple;here Moore approaches the position taken by Russell in his logic built up fromultimate simples, in opposition to the holistic logic of Idealism.29 Moore furthercriticizes all other ethical systems by the argument that good cannot be identifiedwith any one object, such as pleasure or (on the Idealist side) moral duty;The Post-revolutionary Condition • 731there is a plurality of good objects which need have nothing in common. Onthe practical side of ethics, Moore retains a Utilitarian theme in that thegoodness of particular actions is to be judged by their consequences. Here tooMoore turns Utilitarian arguments against their prior tradition, emphasizingthe extreme difficulty of knowing the consequences of actions except in thevery short run. Moore’s practical conclusions go against the grain of all theprevious ethicists, favoring neither religious ends, nor moral righteousness, northe political activism of the greatest good for the greatest number. Instead heendorses personal aestheticism, suggesting that the highest goods are the immediateexperiences of passionate friendship and the contemplation of thebeautiful.Most of Moore’s ingredients were available from his own teachers andcompatriots. Already in 1874 Sidgwick had modified Utilitarian ethics, recognizingthat moral principles cannot be deduced from descriptive statements.While continuing to adhere to universal benevolence as a path to maximizinghappiness, Sidgwick concluded that motivation so to act is greatly affected bymoral intuitions and by beliefs in supernatural sanctions. Bradley had alreadystressed the imprecision of the Utilitarian calculus; and of course in his systemthe good, like everything else, is indefinable. Moore in effect uses Sidgwick andBradley against each other, playing up the portions of each that he wantsto reject: Sidgwick’s continuing focus on political and economic calculation,Bradley’s moralism and his subsumption of ethics in the Idealist Absolute. Norare Moore’s practical conclusions novel; he merely defends with a more formalargument the aestheticism promulgated by Pater and Wilde in the 1880s and1890s, adding a somewhat more explicit endorsement of the cult of homosexualaffairs which had become popular at the time of Lytton Strachey. IfPrincipia Ethica made an immediate sensation, it was less because of itsoriginality than because it symbolized a shift in the old lineup of intellectualoppositions.Most of the creative developments in British philosophy, in all its branches,were concentrated in this period within a single network, centered at Trinityand King’s colleges, Cambridge (see Figure 13.2 above).The group structure ofcreativity is familiar from other periods; in this case we have a wealth ofinformation which enables us to study how such a group was formed and thedynamics of emotional energy that drove it.Leading intellectuals are more elaborately connected by family linkages inthe generations from 1840 to 1920 than at virtually any other time in history:there is an intermarrying network that links Russell, Moore, Keynes, VirginiaWoolf, and the Bloomsbury circle to the Thackerays, Macaulays, Darwins,Maitlands, Trevelyans, Balfours, and many others. They are genuine cousins,in-laws, and nephews, not merely the metaphorical kinfolk produced by master-pupil lineages.30732 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe Victorian-Edwardian intellectual kinship network was based on themobilization of political and religious reform movements in a segment of theupper-middle and upper classes, at a time when the state church was just beingdisestablished and the universities wrested from clerical control. In a highlyclass-stratified society, this set of intellectual dissidents from their class constituteda relatively small group which was drawn together socially and sexuallyby intermarriage. The components of this group were of three main kinds:wealthy Quakers (Moore’s family background, Russell’s by marriage); Evangelicals(prominent in the Idealist movement); plus the reform wing of thearistocracy (of which the Russells were the most famous family). For many ofthese families it became traditional to send their sons to Cambridge, especiallyto Trinity and King’s, where further intermarriages were promoted by sisters’visits. Once numbers had gone beyond a critical mass, the inner group’s culturebegan to drift in its own direction, away from the moral earnestness of itsmembers’ political origins. An elite organized within this elite in the form ofa highly selective discussion society known as the Apostles. The smartestprospects were tapped with the help of former members who gave the prizeexaminations or taught at the famous secondary schools. The group metfrequently to vie in producing wittily iconoclastic papers, surrounded by ritualwhich made it self-conscious of its intellectual superiority and the achievementsof its predecessors (Levy, 1981). In this atmosphere young undergraduates suchas Russell (inducted 1892) and Moore (1894) were encouraged to emulate thelineage going back to Tennyson and including their most famous teachers upthrough Sidgwick and McTaggart.Upon publication of Principia Ethica, Moore became idolized by theyounger Apostles. It was their later success that established his wider reputation,since they included Lytton Strachey, John Maynard Keynes, LeonardWoolf—in short, the male members of the Bloomsbury literary circle whichformed soon thereafter. It is difficult otherwise to understand the adulation inwhich Moore was held throughout the rest of his life. His work on ethics wasnot strikingly original, and his later philosophy was mainly a negative reactionagainst subsequent innovations. Moore became a Durkheimian sacred object,symbolizing the ideal intellectual. He was structurally well situated for the role:in the early 1900s he was the longest-active member of the Apostles, famousfor his frail, youthful good looks and his debating style, combining passionand wit and even sexual tease (Levy, 1981: 213). This image of Moore continuedeven into paunchy middle age; once he was separated from the Apostles,his passionate tone and his aura of avant-garde brilliance faded, but he remaineda symbol, the group’s preferred self-image.In the 1920s and 1930s Moore turned to the defense of common sense.Statements such as that my body was born sometime in the past, or that thisis a hand held up before my face should be taken as true; whatever the sophis-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 733ticated philosophical alternatives that might be raised against such statements,none of their reasons are conclusive, and on the whole they are less certainthan the judgments of commonsense language. The substantive position defendedby Moore is banal; it makes a claim in philosophical attention spaceonly because it was crafted in opposition to other positions. It gives a rationalefor dismissing Idealism, now on its last legs, but also the ontologies ofRussell and Carnap’s mathematical set theory, Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, andHusserlian phenomenology. Against the effort to create a logically perfectlanguage, Moore responds with ordinary language. Nevertheless, it turned outthat this was not the suicide of philosophy, for it had a continuity, if of anegative sort, with preceding technical developments. Russell had shown thedeep problems in formal systems, and Moore’s argument against non-commonsensicalpropositions raised to a principle Russell’s frequently expressed admissionthat logical arguments that appear certain are typically subject to furtherrevision.31Ordinary language turned out to contain a vein of problems to be exploredin its own right. The militancy of the Vienna Circle prodded these developments.Its debates over the nature of meaninglessness led to considerations ofthe multiple dimensions of meaning. When Ayer, arriving home from Vienna,declared in 1936 that all statements not filling the verifiability criterion havethe same standing as the expression “ouch!” his condemnation of the languageof ethics led to outrage and a search for ways to make such statementsmeaningful.32 The strongest impetus was given by Wittgenstein, who nowrepudiated his earlier program for the logically perfect language and launchedthe exploration of the inexpressible ways in which language does not “say”but “shows.” It transpired that what was inexpressible at one point in theself-consciousness of philosophers could indeed give rise to a new realm oflanguage; and although Wittgenstein played on resonances between his laterlinguistic philosophy and his earlier concerns with religious mysticism, a morestraightforward brand of academic investigation in this realm was soon operatingunder the label of Austin’s speech acts and illocutionary forces.33Wittgenstein’s Tortured PathIt is tempting, in parallel to the case of Moore, to attribute these turns of eventsto the unique force of Wittgenstein’s personality. The mystique and adulationsurrounding Wittgenstein, which had begun already at Vienna in the 1920sand ballooned after his return to Cambridge in the 1930s, is more revealingwhen viewed sociologically, as a case study of the interplay of creativity,personality, and reputation. Creativity is driven by the struggle over the limitedslots of attention space, and Wittgenstein’s life was a movement between two734 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsof the core networks of his time. In each place he came in contact with thecurrent attention leader: Russell in 1912–1914, Schlick in 1927–1932, Mooreat Cambridge in the 1910s and again from 1929 until his death in 1951. Eachtime Wittgenstein became the darling of his sponsor, while quickly radicalizingthe existing position in a fashion that transferred greater attention to himself.Another way of saying this is that Wittgenstein battened on the reputationalready achieved—by Russell, by the Vienna Circle, by the ordinary languagemovement. He was so to speak an emotional energy vampire, sucking sustenanceout of his sponsors and transferring it to his own position.There are numerous examples (Monk, 1990; Levy, 1981). Russell’s elationat finding Wittgenstein for a disciple turned to anger and depression as he feltsuperseded, overwhelmed with demands, and periodically rejected by Wittgenstein’sfits of temper. Wittgenstein had the same effect on Moore, treating himalternately as confidant, enemy, and errand boy. Wittgenstein’s famous moodinessmade sense as part of the social dynamics of a small, intensely focusedgroup, constantly reminding its members of their elite status; the rivalries andjealousies both over preeminence and over closeness to the favorite resemblethe popularity contests and love affairs of an adolescent social club. In factthis is a fairly apt description of the Apostles, especially in their phase ofhomosexual affairs (for the most part rather platonic).Wittgenstein’s relationship with the self-conscious preciosity of the societywas emblematic of both their stance and his. Reputations were made inthe Apostles, after initial selection for intellectual brilliance, on the basis oficonoclastic performances. McTaggart had assumed the leadership in the late1880s with a paper “Violets or Orange Blossom?” defending homosexual love;Moore ascended to new heights of candor in 1894 with “Shall we take delightin crushing our roses?” in which he endorsed heterosexual prudery togetherwith masturbation. In 1902 Strachey took over leadership by outshockingeveryone with a paper on defecation as the ultimate artistic act because anexpression of oneness with Nature (Levy, 1981: 103, 144, 231–233). WhenWittgenstein was invited in 1912, in the midst of a round of accusations ofjealousy (against Russell for keeping Wittgenstein for himself, and more generallyover homosexual ties within the group), he delivered the ultimate shockby promptly resigning after his first meeting. Wittgenstein had already hadsimilar experience of the hothouse atmosphere of artistic reputations in Vienna,only there it was suicide which established one’s reputation for passionatecommitment; there was a rash of suicides around the turn of the century,including two of Wittgenstein’s brothers (Johnston, 1972: 174–179). Wittgenstein’sbrooding over suicide during the first few decades of his life, whateverits subjective component, was also a claim for status membership in this elite;the obsession stopped after he established his independent intellectual reputa-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 735tion. Throughout his life Wittgenstein succeeded in finding groups of this sortand making whatever iconoclastic move would bring him into the center ofattention.Back in Vienna, Wittgenstein soon was playing his favorites, coyly makinghimself available to those who paid sufficient deference while blackballingothers from his presence (Coffa, 1991: 241, 404–405). The split in the ViennaCircle dates from Wittgenstein’s meetings with it. Structurally, the ViennaCircle was responsible for Wittgenstein’s later philosophical position. As Carnap,Wittgenstein’s major local rival for attention, explored the problem spaceof formalist semantic systems, Wittgenstein now threw himself into showingthe impossibility of any such system.The Wittgenstein personality cult is the structural counterpart to the wayhis reputation was formed, and to his style of expression. His whole publishedoutput during his lifetime consisted in the Tractatus (together with a 1929paper which he soon repudiated); all other knowledge of his work came fromword of mouth, a mode of transmission which made those who had privilegedaccess to him into charisma-bearing disciples. His style of delivery is unconstrainedby the canons of academic publishing: peremptorily assertive, typicallywithout supporting arguments, but with an aphoristic flair and a literary polishthat make his manuscripts the philosophical equivalent of poetry. Wittgensteinplayed his advantages into an unsurpassed level of intellectual independence.Independently wealthy (like Russell and Moore) and socially well connected,from a family which belonged to the cultivated elite within the Viennese upperclass, he moved where he wanted and did whatever he was interested in; hewas easily accepted among his counterparts in England, and just as easily couldthrow them off to seek escape in the mountains of Norway or a monastery inthe Alps.34 His cultural and social credentials gained him rapid entrée, whilehis tone of passionate dedication—giving himself over to the emotional energyof making maximal impact on the attention space—lent his arrogance andbad manners the recognizable excuse of being interpreted as unique genius.Wittgenstein’s personality was his network position. He was the one individualwho had been in all the analytical camps; and his creative shifts to newphilosophies, which came at the moments when he changed physical location,came across as his extreme individualism. He was not merely personallyidiosyncratic and egocentric; he had found the slot available for the boundarybreaker, for the rearranger of factions, and there is room for only one suchperson to be successful in the attention space.Wittgenstein became great because the network cores on which he fed werestructurally deep and in the midst of realignment. Several generations ofdebates within the mathematical network had raised the reflexive recognitionof meta-levels and the creative role of formal symbolism. When these issues736 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsbecame sufficiently generalized, some mathematicians flowed into philosophy,meshing with philosophical disputes and initiating the several prongs of twentieth-century philosophy. Ordinary language philosophy was a reaction oftraditional philosophers against this invasion of their base. It remained sophisticatedrather than banal because the formalists were implicitly present as afoil; the tension between the two became the “analytical” problem space.From Mathematical Foundations Crisis to Husserl’s PhenomenologyRealignment in the early 1900s happened on all sides. As we return to pick upthe growth of the phenomenological movement, it is well to keep in mind thatits origins in the networks and issues of the turn of the century are much thesame as those of the logical positivists. The older network as a whole wastransforming itself, and the sharp conflict between the two sides did not emergeuntil fairly late, as the attention space became organized around new lines ofopposition. Both movements grew from amalgamations between the leadingmathematicians of the foundational crisis and the Neo-Kantian lineage. Wherethe ingredients differ is that the positivists added a third strand, the physicists’methodological dispute centered around Mach, whereas the phenomenologistswere tied instead to the movement of new experimental psychology in Brentano’sbranch. This is not to say that the intellectual ingredients remaineduntransformed by these new combinations. Phenomenology began as a sharpconfrontation of psychological and anti-psychological positions, finding a compromisewhich shifted increasingly toward the anti-psychological side. Similarly,phenomenology’s roots in mathematics became obliterated as the movementlater turned into intense opposition to the entire scientific worldview atjust the time when the logical positivists were making their most imperialistclaims. The paths of phenomenology and of positivism in the larger philosophicalspace are those of a growing polarization between extremes.Husserl’s phenomenology popped up like a cork buffeted from all sides ofthe mathematical-philosophical controversies of turn-of-the-century Germany.He began at the heart of the mathematical establishment in Berlin, as a pupilof Kronecker and assistant to Weierstrass. Husserl’s dissertation and first book(1889) combined his teachers’ positions: Kronecker tried to reduce all ofmathematics to a foundation of the natural numbers, while Weierstrass led thearithmetization of analysis. Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic generalizes theissue and treats it with the psychological approach of Brentano, another ofHusserl’s teachers during his Wanderjahre through the German universities.Frege had just published his masterwork (1884) eliminating psychologism fromlogic; in a review Frege criticized Husserl’s work, resulting in correspondencebetween them and the conversion of Husserl to Frege’s anti-psychological po-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 737sition. When Husserl moved to Halle as a Dozent, his colleague Cantorintroduced him to Bolzano’s logic and made him sympathetic to the programof transfinite numbers and set theory (Tragesser, 1984: 6; Mohanty, 1982).Husserl came onto the scene in the midst of the foundational controversy inmathematics and was personally connected to most of the dramatis personae.Weierstrass had been the leading rigorist since the 1860s; Kronecker was theleading critic of apparent absurdities arising from the new axiomatic and settheoreticalmethods; he was a bitter enemy of Cantor, who felt that Kronecker’spersecution was destroying his career, and an opponent of Weierstrass, as chiefpromulgator of insidious methods. Cross-pressured by his conflicting contacts,Husserl established his own position in the early 1900s, contemporaneous withthe rival foundational programs in mathematics: Russell’s derivation of mathematicsfrom logic in 1903–1910, Hilbert’s formalism announced in 1904, andBrouwer’s intuitionism in 1907. Husserl was Hilbert’s colleague at Göttingenduring 1901–1916 when the issue surfaced.35 His own views moved away fromHilbert’s radical conventionalism in a direction that got them taken seriouslyby the intuitionists in their concern to justify intuitions of mathematical practicewhich are deeper than artificial rules of logic.Husserl’s Logical Investigations (1900), growing out of the logicist camp,broadens beyond mathematics the search for secure foundations. His ambitionwas to provide foundations for all science and philosophy, to make philosophyitself a “rigorous science,” in the title of his 1911 paper. Husserl was a hybridbetween the mathematical lineages and Brentano’s school. His added ingredientwas Brentano’s doctrine of the intentionality of consciousness, but interpretedin an anti-psychological fashion, moving away from the naturalism whichBrentano had championed in opposition to Neo-Kantian Idealism. Brentanohad ridden to fame with the movement to establish an empirical researchdiscipline in psychology. His version of psychological imperialism had proposedto induce the laws of logic. Now this ran head-on into the movementof mathematical foundationalists, for whom logic was no longer an archaicdiscipline, a soft spot in the philosophical curriculum, but an arena of vigorousexploration in its own right. The split between psychological and anti-psychologicalapproaches, manifested in Husserl’s personal network—Brentano neverforgave him for converting to the enemy’s position—became explicit as ontologicallevels in Husserl’s philosophy: on one side the natural attitude of theempirical ego; on the other the realm of essences, revealed by bracketingquestions of the existence of objects. Husserl creates a new philosophicalposition by incorporating the defining ideas of his immediate networks intothe contents of his own philosophy, turning conflicting doctrines into a hierarchyof levels of analysis—a Durkheimian reflection of social structure in thecontents of ideas.738 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsHusserl’s epochê is not Descartes’s skeptical doubt, clearing the decks ofeverything given; it retains the surface of phenomenal appearance as the startingpoint for a deep ontology. The essence of consciousness is to be intentional;objects are first and foremost things that are intended, whether or not theyexist in sensory experience. Husserl twists this characteristic doctrine of Brentanointo congruity with that of his mathematical logicist friends. As in Frege,for Husserl “to be” adds nothing to the object predicated, but operates onlyon the pragmatic, naturalistic level; as in Cantor, the realm of logical objectsis eternal and transcends ordinary sensory experience. Geometry is the exemplarof phenomenology as the science of pure essence, studying ideal objectssuperior to lines scratched on a chalkboard (Roberts, 1972: 192, 195).Husserl’s work coincided with a general breaking up of the Brentano camp(see Figure 13.8). Meinong was Husserl’s network sibling, as a pupil of Brentano,and the two were rivals for prime attention in the decade of the early1900s, working out problems within the same cultural capital. In Meinong’scase, the distinctive ingredient came not from hybridization with the mathematicallineages but by moving closer to the new movement of psychologists.Meinong regarded philosophy as a natural science and promoted empiricalpsychology in his own laboratory; his exploration of the constituents of consciousnesswas expressly modeled on chemistry (Lindenfeld, 1980: 115–123,148–157). Between 1899 and 1904 Meinong elaborated a series of distinctionsin answer to problems which had arisen within Brentano’s doctrine of intentionalityand in the new empirical psychology. What is the ontological statusof perceptual gestalts, configurations over and above the particular qualitieswhich receive their significance within them? What is the ontological status ofnegative ideas (e.g., hole, infinity, non-smoker)? For these too are intended bythe mind and arouse feelings perhaps even stronger than positively existingobjects. In what sense can consciousness intend a relation as an object (e.g.,the similarity between a copy and its original; or indeed the higher-orderrelations among relations, which Bradley had recently cited as an infiniteregress to prove the incoherence of relations)? And in what sense can one intendimaginary objects, insofar as they are not merely existences in the mind? Forit is possible to distinguish between Hamlet and someone’s thought of Hamlet.Meinong solves these problems by distinguishing three kinds of being: existenceof objects; subsistence (Bestehung) of relations and imaginary objects, evencontradictory ones like a round square; and so-being (Sosein), the characteristicsof objects independent of particular existence in time and space, knowna priori and with certainty.Meinong proposes a new science, Gegenstandstheorie (theory of objects),more general than metaphysics, which deals only with being, whereas subsistenceand so-being are “indifferent to being.” Mathematics is the science ofThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 739FIGURE 13.8. NETWORK OF PHENOMENOLOGISTS ANDEXISTENTIALISTS, 1865–1965so-being, but it needs to be further generalized, since there are further realmsof so-being which are not quantifiable. Meinong parallels Husserl’s explorationof realms beyond naturalistic objects, and in several respects he too formulatessomething like Husserl’s phenomenology and a generalization of mathematics.It is not surprising that these two philosophers, originating close together inthe network, should have regarded each other’s ideas with rivalry and distrust(Lindenfeld, 1980: 244–246). But each combined his own blend of ingredients.Meinong had links to empirical psychology and to naturalism, from whichHusserl expressly distanced himself. Where Meinong grants logical paradoxes(the square circle) the quasi-ontological status of subsisting objects, Husserl,as an ex-mathematician seeking deductive essential truth, finds it absurd to doso. On the territory of logic, Meinong remained the loyalist of the Brentanolineage, willing to give priority to the empirical propensities of the mind tothink in terms of noun slots, even if what we put into those slots is notcoherent. Husserl moved in tandem with the mathematical logicists, scuttlingthe psychological level as the realm of superficial mistakes. For a few yearsMeinong was the more famous of the two; after 1910 Meinong’s solutionswere upstaged while Husserl’s phenomenological movement took off.As the Frege camp from which Husserl started developed toward the logicalpositivism of the Vienna Circle, and as Meinong expanded the realm of objects,Husserl shifted his alliances and moved toward a non-religious Idealism. Thequestion arises of the status of the ego in the process of epochê: If consciousnessis purely intentional, how can it intend itself, which is not an object butonly an empty unifier or frame? Husserl uncovers successive levels of reduction:the empirical ego of psychology, the ego of the epochê, and finally an impersonaltranscendental ego, which is the ultimate ground of the very possibilityof consciousness. This position, developed around 1913 in Ideas, broughtHusserl closer to the Neo-Kantians; at this time he became friendly withRickert, with whom Husserl in 1910 had founded the journal Logos, and whorecommended Husserl as his own successor to the professorship at Freiburg(Roberts, 1972: 159).A phenomenological movement now grew up. At first it comprised twocircles (Spiegelberg, 1982). One surrounded Husserl at Göttingen during 1907–1916; its object-centered phenomenology remained relatively close to Meinong.Among its members were Heinrich Rickert, Jr., son of the Neo-Kantian leader;Koyré, a former pupil of Bergson from Paris; Roman Imgarden; HelmuthPlessner, who later developed philosophical anthropology and was influentialin German sociology; William Ernest Hocking, a Harvard protégé ofRoyce; and Jean Hering, an Alsatian who became the leader of a Strasbourgschool of Protestant theologians, influential in introducing phenomenology intoFrance after that region was ceded from Germany at the end of the First WorldThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 741War. Another circle formed at Munich around 1905, initially among thestudents of Theodor Lipps;36 its members maintained contact with Göttingenand fed recruits to Husserl as pupils, finally breaking up at the end of the war.The most flamboyant new star to come out of these networks was MaxScheler. Of a slightly earlier generation, Scheler had already met Husserl in1901 through their mutual connection with the Neo-Kantian Vaihinger, buthis major creativity did not come until 1912, soon after he fell in with thecircle of Husserl’s followers at Munich, while simultaneously maintaining abridge to Göttingen. Like the still bigger star-to-be Heidegger, Scheler was arenegade pupil of a Neo-Kantian teacher (in this case Liebmann, the originatorof the “back to Kant” movement); both revolted against the subjective screenof Neo-Kantian categories, taking phenomenology as a mode of access toobjective essences in themselves. Scheler dramatically widened the applicationof phenomenology to an emotional epochê and the intentionality of emotionalacts. Scheler’s phenomenology consists to a large extent in imputing underlyingmotives: for instance, he claims that modern ethical subjectivity, taking valuesas moral attitudes of the individual mind, is the result of ressentiment, aquasi-Nietzschean revolt of the weak against the objective values they cannotfulfill. This, together with the hierarchy of values culminating in the church,earned Scheler a reputation as “the Catholic Nietzsche.” There is in fact anetwork contact: Scheler’s teacher was Eucken, a former colleague of the youngNietzsche, who had become famous in the early 1900s for his vitalist spiritualism.All three of this lineage—Nietzsche, Eucken, Scheler—stood out bycombining academic with popular audiences (Schnädelbach, 1984: 186–188;Gadamer, 1985: 29–33; Staude, 1967). Scheler quickly eclipsed Husserl’s fame,especially for wider audiences; it was Scheler, less technical in his analysis, whospread the fame of the movement by the 1920s. He was the first to visit Franceand make contact with French philosophers, and the first to be translated intoFrench.As with many philosophers, Husserl’s position was transformed by animplicit struggle over his own movement when he acquired followers. His mostaggressive convert, Scheler, had taken command of the naturalistic level ofphenomenological analysis; at just this time Husserl, dancing past him in theopposite direction, moved closer to the Neo-Kantian stance. As his own movementof technical phenomenologists became known in the 1920s, Husserl distancedhimself once again.37 He gave priority now to the life-world and to thehistorical unfolding of time, downplaying eternal essences. In his early workHusserl had characterized existence—the merely empirical, material realm—aswhat is here and now, in time and space. Space is recoverable for the idealrealm (via geometry), but time is not; time is the locus of individuation andmatter (Roberts, 1972: 175). This lesser realm is promoted in Husserl’s later742 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswork. The spatiotemporal frame is what unites the infinity of things. Eventuallyhe would see it as the setting or “horizon” within which life can emerge, arealm of transcendence in the midst of experience. The concepts of a transcendenthorizon of personal existence and of the primordiality of time became keypoints for the existentialism of Jaspers and Heidegger.Heidegger: Catholic Anti-modernismIntersects the Phenomenological MovementNow at the height of its drawing power, the phenomenological network underwenta public split. A rival center of creative energy crystallized aroundHeidegger, whose Sein und Zeit (1927) branched off from Husserl’s middleperiod. As with all creative work, Heidegger’s resulted from a confluence ofnetworks. To recapitulate these in biographical form inevitably results inreconstructing the story in a Heidegger-centric way, since we have selected hislife for study only in retrospect of his fame. It takes a gestalt switch to moveinto the foreground what we glimpse through the keyhole of Heidegger’s life,and to see just those milieux as producing the intellectual transformation thatreceives greatest attention in Heidegger’s work.Heidegger begins as a bright young student of Catholic peasant background,no doubt one of many educated on church scholarships. After brieflyattempting a Jesuit novitiate, Heidegger in 1909 enters the local university,Freiburg, one of the few in Germany which has an exclusively Catholic theologicalfaculty (Guignon, 1993; Ringer, 1969: 253; Kisiel, 1993). It is the periodof intense struggle against modernism within the church, culminating a conflictgoing back to the 1860s. The unification of Germany in 1871 was followedby the Kulturkampf as the Humboldtian revolution of secularized education,long since settled in the Prussian north, was forcibly extended to the Catholicstates of the south. In these same decades the unification of Italy against theresistance of the papal state and struggles over secularized education in theFrench Third Republic had provoked the papacy into militant defense oftradition against science and secular culture. Some Catholic intellectuals resisted,among them Brentano, who left the priesthood in protest in 1873.Against recurring modernist tendencies within Catholic schools and universities,the pope in 1907–1910 wielded the charge of heresy and demanded fidelityto doctrines of miracles and other items of faith (Caputo, 1993: 271; Sheehan,1993: 73–75). Heidegger enters the intellectual space as a manifestation of theanti-modernist movement, whose doctrine he upheld in Catholic house organsin his first publications.Freiburg brings him into the orbit of other intellectual movements. Themathematical foundations crisis attracts him, through his Neo-Kantian teach-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 743ers. But his career plan is to acquire the chair in Catholic theology, and inreturn for support by a church grant, he gives up a Habilitationsschrift on thelogical essence of number—which would have made him a parallel to Carnapstudying in these same years under Frege (1910–1914), or even to Wittgenstein,beginning work with Russell. Heidegger shifts instead to a topic from theScotists of the late 1300s, whose technical acumen enables him in safe antimodernistguise to engage the issues of the early 1900s. This medieval culturalcapital fits the modern context, for it comes from the apex of reflexive argumentthat culminated the old academic networks. Scholasticism had long sincebecome ignored in the attention space, reviled alike by Humanists, scientists,Protestants, and liberals. Now it reappears as a hidden treasure, at the timewhen modern university recruitment had expanded to take in even its enemiesfrom the Catholic backwaters. The network of the 1300s could hold its ownwith the technicalities of 1900. Heidegger has no need to set aside his concernfor the mathematical foundations crisis, and he depicts his task in Sein undZeit ([1927] 1953: 9–10) as dealing with a foundational issue cross-cuttingsciences as widely as the mathematics of formalists and intuitionists, as wellas relativity physics, biology, and theology.Brentano, the most famous and controversial of modern German Catholics,would inevitably become part of a young Catholic intellectual’s reading; foran anti-modernist, Brentano’s later psychology would be suspect, but Brentano’searly work On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle (1862) was safe,and the text had been given to Heidegger in his school days. In this workBrentano had put the cultural capital of medieval scholasticism back into playin the context of contemporary debate started by his own teacher Trendelenburgwith late Hegelian historians and Kantians. Aquinas and Duns Scotushad raised the issue of the univocality of being, and Brentano had worked outthis issue, using the tools of modern textual scholarship. Aristotle had takenbeing in various senses: as accident (copula), as being true, as potential versusactual being, and in the being of the categories (quality, quantity, relation, andso on). Brentano ([1862] 1975: 66–68) had held that the categories, as themost general predicates of first substance, are the highest genera of being.Heidegger is critical of Brentano’s solution, but the question lingers and eventuallyis resurrected when Heidegger formulates his own philosophical project.The problem of the meaning of being, in the full sense raised by Duns Scotusand, according to Heidegger, forgotten since then, is to characterize the beingwhich underlies God as well as creation. For Heidegger, the question raisesagain the wonder of being among the pre-Socratics, and subsumes the mostprofound modern questions: the reality of higher mathematical abstractionsand of Meinong’s impossible Golden Mountain or square circle which find aplace in the intentionality of consciousness and which troubled Russell in theearly 1900s.38744 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsNo doubt other Catholic students on the periphery of German philosophyhad Brentano and Scotus available as cultural capital, without any real chanceof moving them to the center of attention. Heidegger’s own work remainsunexceptional until after 1916, when two things happen: he is passed over forthe chair in Catholic theology, and he meets Husserl, newly arrived at Freiburg.Heidegger undergoes a conversion, away from Catholicism and into the newmovements of Protestant theology. Husserl, from an ethnic Jewish backgroundand now calling himself a “free Christian,” is suspicious of Catholic dogmatistsand receives him only after assurances of Heidegger’s conversion. Heideggerbecomes his assistant and favorite disciple. Heidegger had known Husserl’searly writings but only as relevant to his abandoned interest in logic andmathematics; it is personal contact in the network that jolts his emotionalenergy and sets him to work using Husserl’s tools. By the early 1920s, withoutpublishing anything new, Heidegger is acquiring an underground reputationas the most passionate and original thinker in Husserl’s stable (Gadamer, 1985:15, 46–48; Dostal, 1993: 150–151). For now the phenomenological movementis followed in some quarters with a fanaticism paralleling the followers ofMarxism or Stefan George. Husserl programmatically divided philosophy intoregional ontologies (material nature, animate life, persons) to be worked outby the phenomenological method. Heidegger is assigned the regional ontologyof the historical sciences. This was to be Sein und Zeit, eventually publishedin Husserl’s yearbook, established (in 1920) to bring together the results ofthese phenomenological researches.Heidegger’s social location made him more than a phenomenological disciple.His unique trajectory as lapsed Catholic theologian was reinforced whenhe moved to Marburg as Extraordinarius (1923–1928). Marburg was the greatNeo-Kantian center, and its last head, Natorp, was treated by Heidegger withgreat respect. Rickert, his own Neo-Kantian teacher at Freiburg, he regardedwith disdain; the epistemological and value concepts of Neo-Kantianism werejust the kind of bloodless philosophy which Heidegger regarded as forgetfulnessof the ontology of being. The aging Natorp, though, had turned awayfrom the liberal ethicization of religion which had prevailed with Cohen andthe earlier Marburg school, and was grappling with the question of the individualityof God and of concrete worldly being. Neo-Kantianism was dying asthe spotlight shifted elsewhere. Nicolai Hartmann, the last star of the Neo-Kantian lineage, was Heidegger’s rival on the young Marburg faculty, and hetoo was deviating in the direction of subordinating epistemology to ontology;even the Kantian critique presupposes a metaphysics, and the thing-in-itselfcan be approached by using tools borrowed from Husserl’s phenomenology.Hartmann recombined intellectual ingredients which overlapped with those ofHeidegger; but Hartmann remained more of a traditional Neo-Kantian, andthe result of their similarity was that Heidegger’s greater originality ended upThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 745putting Hartmann in the shade (Gadamer, 1985: 23–26; Schnädelbach, 1984:209–216).Scheler, who occasionally visited Marburg in the 1920s from his chair inCologne, mixed cultural capitals in a fashion similar to Heidegger but with anopposite trajectory; having become a follower of Husserlian phenomenologyaround 1910, at the end of the war he converted to Catholicism. Scheler arrivedin 1919 at his religious turn by claiming to uncover an objective hierarchy ofvalues: at lowest, the utilitarian plane of pleasures; next, vital values promotinghealth and social well-being; still higher, spiritual values of justice, beauty, andtruth; at the apex, the spiritual values embodied in religion. In action, the lowervalues are to be sacrificed to higher ones. After 1924 Scheler converted again,giving up the Catholic personal God for a kind of vitalist pantheism. Heidegger,who remained sympathetic to Scheler’s restless searches until his death in 1928,was moving in a similar path of recasting theology in a depersonalized form.We find the same again in Jaspers: technical borrowing from phenomenologyaround 1913, in this case for the psychiatric description of pathologicalstates;39 teaching in a Neo-Kantian stronghold (Heidelberg), in the 1920smoving toward what later became called existentialism (in Germany, Existenzphilosophie).Jaspers’s major works, emerging in 1931–1932 on the heels ofHeidegger’s fame, preserve traditional Christian themes of God, freedom, andimmortality, not as demonstrable truths but as existential questions and choicesbeyond the limits of scientific reason.Marburg at this time was a center of controversies in Protestant theology.Traditionally it had been a leader of the liberal historical school; out of thiscamp had come Bultmann, theology professor at Marburg from 1921 onward,who became Heidegger’s close friend.40 Also visiting at Marburg in 1924 wasPaul Tillich, a leader of the Christian-socialist movement in the postwar revolts,just beginning to move into existentialism. The major stimulus in Protestanttheology was Karl Barth, professor at Göttingen since 1921; Barth had justlaunched neo-orthodoxy in 1919, overthrowing the liberal theology of hisyouth, as a series of false steps in the direction of secularism. Schleiermacherhad subjectivized the path to God into seeking within oneself. From Kantonward God had been narrowed into ethical and social concerns. Historicaland textual scholarship was another false path: it is not man that seeks Godbut God that seeks man; true religiousness consists in making oneself open torevelation. Bultmann, as a leading New Testament exegete, entered into correspondenceand controversy with Barth, seeking a way to reconcile textualscholarship and Christian revitalization. In the face of scientific criticism, thehistorical reports of Jesus’ life and resurrection cannot be accepted; the message,however, is to be not merely ethicized but taken as the expression ofuniversal religious experience, the sensations of awe and dread, of being astranger in the world and open to something beyond it.746 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsHeidegger was moving along the same path; reacting against his startingpoint in Catholic scholasticism, he overturned the secure ontologies of a Godas highest and original Being, transforming his theological capital instead intoa series of questions. Using phenomenological language, Heidegger produceda universal ontology of human existence underlying both Greek and Christianthought: the central realities are not immortality but being-toward-death; notsalvation but angst, care, and decision; not sin but the sheer arbitrary fact ofbeing thrown into existing in the world in a particular time and place. Thethemes emerged in common with Bultmann, Jaspers, Tillich, and others; afterHeidegger gave them articulation in most general form in Sein und Zeit, theybecame all the more explicitly defended in a self-consciously existentialisttheology which reached its height in the 1950s.Why did this movement emerge, across a broad front, at the time when itdid? To speak of the disillusionment of bourgeois culture after the First WorldWar is not quite accurate, for there was neither disillusionment in every aspectof cultural life (certainly not in the popular culture of the cinema and of jazz,which appeared at this time), nor in many branches of philosophy, such aslogical positivism. It is specifically a disillusionment with liberal theology thatis at issue here. Nor was it a product of the war, since its manifestations goback to the first decade of the century, among other things, the height of vitalistphilosophies in Germany and France. During 1910–1914 were published inGermany the first translations of Kierkegaard and Dostoyevsky—bringingabout their first widespread fame—and the complete edition of Nietzsche’sposthumous Will to Power. The theological responses of a Danish anti-Idealistof the 1840s and of a Russian anti-modernist Slavophile of the 1860s and1870s were quickly incorporated into the conceptual armory of the newgeneration of philosophers and theologians of 1920. This could only havehappened if motives existed for their reception. It was a movement againstaccommodation to secularism in religion, against turning religion into merelyuniversal ethics or a social gospel, against rationalizing the mysteriously personalGod into an abstract Spirit. In general it was a movement reasserting theemotionally committed faith of particularistic religious traditions in the faceof the tolerant universalizing which reaches across confessional borders byreducing religious content to the blandest common denominator.Seen in this perspective, the conservative or neo-traditionalist movementsin theology beginning around 1910 are one turn of a very widespread cycle ofreligious accommodation and revival. It is not to be explained, with teleologicalpathos, as the forebear of Nazism, nor as a once-and-for-all downfall of liberalsecularism. Sociologists of religion discern this cycle quite generally, in theUnited States as much as in European churches, and have uncovered a numberof its mechanisms (Stark and Bainbridge, 1987). Movements for secularization,tolerance, and liberty of belief generate enthusiasm as rebellions against domi-The Post-revolutionary Condition • 747nant established churches, especially ones which rule with the aid of statemonopoly. But as secularization succeeds and religion becomes privatized, theliberal churches and their rationalizing intellectuals lose their distinctivelyreligious offering. To fill the unmet demand for religious emotions, on one sidespring up new religions and pseudo-religious cults. The Stefan George circle,Steiner’s Anthroposophy, occultism, and many other movements of late Wilhelmineand Weimar Germany are analogues to the cult movements of anyperiod of a volatile religious market, such as in the United States both in the1920s and in the 1960s–1970s. On the other side, some intellectuals of theolder churches, recognizing the decline of their organizations’ appeal, soughtto revitalize from within by a neo-conservative movement. Such religiousmovements can make allies with external, more purely political movements ofconservatism, but it is a mistake to see their dynamic as merely a political one.The Protestantism of Barth, Bultmann, and Tillich, and the allied existentialismof Heidegger and Jaspers, are by no means simply a side-eddy of fascism,although there are some places of overlap. Much more generally the religiousmovement preserved its own standpoint against the encroachment of politicaltotalitarianism.41Division of the Phenomenological MovementSein und Zeit was the reputation-making work for Heidegger, and the greatwork of German existential phenomenology, because it synthesizes in abstractand general form the key intellectual resources of these several networks. Evenas it proposes the destruction of the history of Western philosophy, it reconstructsthat history around a central question, calling attention to the mostgeneral metaphysical issue that can be raised. The search for the univocalontology of being resonates with the religious concept of God, but it is aproperly philosophical question in its own sphere; it is precisely becauseHeidegger carries through his philosophical construction that theology receivesa new resource. Scotism is not revived but transformed. Phenomenology iscarried so far afield that it acquires not an extension but a rival. Neo-Kantianismdies serving as foil for a position which rejects epistemological issuescentered on a subject over against a mind-filtered world, putting in its place abeing, Dasein, whose primordial nature is existing-in-a-world. The questionshifts elsewhere. It is no longer a question of whether and how there are facts,but of the ontology of dealing with the brute factuality of existence as presence.Dasein has access to being, but the meaning of being, especially the issue of aunivocal being underlying all its modes, now comes to the fore. Philosophy,which lives on its problems, is set on a new course.Technically, Heidegger was continuing Husserl’s project. Husserl had long748 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsbeen concerned with the phenomenology of time, although in his earlier workit remained a subsidiary issue. In the 1920s, in parallel to Heidegger, Husserlincreasingly focused on time as central to the being of entities in general.Husserl’s phenomenological “now” has “retentive” and “protentive” aspects,not merely on the naturalistic psychological level of memory and anticipation,but at a deeper ontological level. In Heidegger’s version, being in general ishistorical, constituted in its past and its project into the future. Husserl struggledinconclusively to work out the relations among time in general, the naturaltime of the spatial world, and the historical time of human consciousness.42Heidegger seized on the conjecture that human Dasein, which is manifestlytemporal, is the key to the understanding of being in general as temporal. Inthe end, Heidegger too foundered on the difficulty in leaping from the humansphere to the more general one.Several key points differ between the two philosophers. For Husserl, subjectivityremains the privileged reference point. But Heidegger wishes to breakwith any trace of the Idealist tradition; to assert the priority of the spiritualsubject waters down religious tension and makes salvation virtually automatic.The Neo-orthodox theologians had already revolted against this easy formof religion, and Heidegger sharpens the distinction on ontological grounds.Dasein is being-in-the-world, and mortality rather than immortality is centralto it; there is anguish as to whether spiritual transcendence can exist at all.Heidegger therefore jettisons the phenomenological epochê, which by bracketingthe reality of the world had left out the fundamental trait of Dasein.43Husserl was moving in the 1920s toward depicting temporality as central tophenomenology; Heidegger greatly outpaced his teacher in dramatizing thesignificance of the move by stressing that Dasein’s relation to temporality maybe authentic or inauthentic, cutting itself off from its deepest reality by evadingits own future, its death. A good deal of Heidegger’s phenomenological analysisof the social world resembles that of other Husserl followers; both Heideggerand Schutz see the ordinary world as constituted by taken-for-granted routines.In Schutz’s Phenomenology of the Social World (1932), this is merely a technicalanalysis completing Max Weber’s social verstehen as the foundations ofeconomic action. For Heidegger it is a target for preaching, like the medievalfriar recalling worldly humans to meditate on their mortality.44Heidegger’s ontological project ended a failure. He never did demonstratethe univocality of being. In 1962 he declared that it had foundered on theproblem of connecting Dasein and the extantness of the spatial world (Dostal,1993: 160). Part II of Sein und Zeit, which was to reconstruct the historicalpath by which Western ontology had gone wrong, was left unfinished becauseof his inability to finish the last section of Part I, which was to move from thetemporality of Dasein to the temporality of being in general. Heidegger’s laterThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 749work turns away from Dasein, and in mood of increasing hostility to Christianity,looks directly for a way in which Being “speaks to us.” His search forthe meaning of being in history takes on the appearance of seeking a neweschatology, of the possibility of God appearing again in the world.45 Even inits failure, Heidegger’s ontological project gave a new attention center and setof problems for the intellectual world. His Dasein analysis, designed merely asentry point to the general question of being, became a defining point for theburgeoning movement of existentialist theology and psychology. Late in thecentury his historicizing, shorn of its ontology and its eschatological overtones,became a favorite text for postmodernists. Heidegger also provided the wayfor one more grand attempt on the core territory of ontology; in the hands ofSartre, the inability to found being in general is turned into the central pointof a system in which being is characterized by its negativity, its lack offoundation.Husserl’s phenomenology, like any successful movement, divides into opposingtendencies. Somewhat like Kant in his later years, Husserl was in partswept up in the movement he had spawned, in part appalled by the directionsin which it was going. Husserl saw his own earlier formalism, his own searchfor rigorously scientific foundations, as typical of the pathological consciousnessemerging within modern history. He declared that phenomenology mustproceed by the “suspension of the presupposition of objectivity” (Roberts,1972: 209); he was now an enemy of the scientism which he saw as thehallmark of the age, and which was becoming famous in the manifestos of theVienna Circle. He took on an apocalyptic tone; the topic of his last work, TheCrisis of the European Sciences, is equated in a 1935 lecture with “The Crisisof European Man.” Crisis had been Husserl’s stock-in-trade all his life. Nowthe foundational crisis of mathematics since the 1880s had been replaced inHusserl’s perception by a crisis arising from the impersonality of scientism—thetriumph of the natural attitude over the realm of eternal truths. At the sametime, Husserl attacked in the other direction, against irrationalism—all tooobvious in the ideology of the victorious Nazis—and against his protégéHeidegger: “The downfall of Europe is its estrangement from its own rationalsense of life, its fall into hostility toward the spirit and into barbarity” (quotedin Natanson, 1973: 145).But the Nazis were not primarily an intellectual movement at all, and theirrise to power was based on geopolitical and economic crises that had nothingto do with philosophy. This did not prevent virtually every intellectual movementof the 1930s and for several decades thereafter from blaming theirintellectual rivals for Nazism, as the alleged result of failing to adopt the properpremises, whether those of Marxism, logical positivism, ordinary language,Popper’s fallibilism, existentialism, or phenomenology. The intellectual crisis750 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswhich by the 1930s Husserl was perceiving as the downfall of the entireWestern cultural tradition was the usual condition of intellectual life: itscreative bursts which come through exploiting the deep troubles of previousmovements, forming new movements which undergo splits and clashes of theirown. With Husserl, the explicit invocation of crisis became a key intellectualresource. This was not the least of the cultural capital which was appropriatedby his followers.The Ideology of the Continental-Anglo SplitThe realignment of philosophical parties produced a double dose of intellectualconflict. There was the expectable polemic of the new versus the old, as wellas new lines of dispute taking over the center of attention. All this is normal.At the same time, each of the several post-realignment movements of the earlytwentieth century became unprecedentedly vehement in their condemnation ofany other mode of doing philosophy. This partisanship outlasted virtually everyother substantive feature of their programs.Although verification, physicalism, unified science, and logical foundationalismwere gradually given up, the central characteristic of the Vienna Circlebecame defining for a large wing of philosophy. Its hallmark was militantrejection of all philosophies that could be styled metaphysical. The positionhad its blind spot, insofar as the militants themselves usually had their ontologicalpreferences, and in fact there was an outburst of systems that reducedlarge areas of reality to fundamentals: atomic states of affairs in Wittgenstein’sTractatus, Platonic reals and then sense-experiences in Russell’s successivesystems, the entities of physics in Carnap and Neurath. These militant reductionistsand demarcationists jolted everyone into awareness of a deep-seatedchange in the bases of intellectual production: the old identity of the generalpurposeintellectual had given way to that of one specialist among others,speaking a language and dealing with problems that are no more accessible tooutsiders than the technicalities of mathematics or chemistry. This would betrue, too, of the opponents of the logicists; phenomenologists, existentialists,and later in the century poststructuralists would also speak in the technicaljargon of insiders. The militant ideology of the formalizers, even though it wasunable to make good on its substantive claims, sent a shock wave throughoutthe intellectual world because it presented in exaggerated form what wasbecoming inescapable in the ordinary conditions of academic work.The lineup of enemies differed in the various national arenas. In Germany,first it was Neo-Kantianism to be disposed of; with the popularity of Husserl’sphenomenology by the 1920s, that too became a target (for instance, inPopper’s attack on “essentialism”). When Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit came onThe Post-revolutionary Condition • 751the scene in 1927, his emphasis on negation was singled out by Carnap in thesecond issue of Erkenntnis (1931) as the epitome of meaningless statementsarising by misuse of language. In England and the United States, the initialenemy of the logicist movement was the Idealism of the previous generation,during which the university had secularized; the attack had begun with Russellearly in the century, and continued down through the 1960s in the tendencyto brand all metaphysical philosophy an outmoded relic of religion. Whenexistentialism came into vogue in France in the 1940s and in Germany and inU.S. literary circles in the 1950s, it replaced Idealism as the prime target forcondemnation.In this midcentury generation the scheme became widely accepted in theEnglish-speaking world of a long-standing division between “Continental” and“Anglo” philosophical traditions. For the purposes of this polemic, the rivalrybetween logical positivists and ordinary language was downplayed into a grandcoalition of “analytic” philosophy characterizing the “Anglo” camp. One sidein the overriding dispute was styled as metaphysical (and, depending on one’sloyalties, either meaningless pseudo-problems or the major questions of philosophy),the other as empiricist, scientific, and commonsensical (and henceeither sound rationality or else banalities and narrow technicalities). This crudeand inconsistent division was the partisan ideology of midcentury factions,projected backwards onto history. Its plausibility requires that we overlook thephilosophers who happen to be in the wrong camp (most glaringly Berkeley,Green, Bradley, Royce, Peirce, and McTaggart in the Anglo sphere; Condillac,Comte, Feuerbach, Büchner, Taine, Frege, Mach, and of course the ViennaCircle on the Continent), or go through gyrations of selective reinterpretation(such as those applied to aspects of Leibniz, Berkeley, and Peirce).46 In reality,the interpenetration of science and philosophy had been a common characteristicof all European philosophy, and the networks of significant philosophershad more often crossed the English Channel than they had been dividedby it. The dichotomy was hardly one that would have come naturally tophilosophers of Russell’s generation or any previously. Lockean empiricismwas the rage among Parisian philosophes; after the university revolution, firstGerman Idealism, then German materialism and mathematics were the beaconstars for British modernizers.What made this Continental-Anglo dichotomy dominant was the combinationof the Nazis, World War II, and the emigration of the Vienna Circle.In the United States, where most of the logical positivists ended up, the influxcoincided with the expansion of the universities under secular auspices and thefinal dying out of the Idealist generation. It also was the period of expansionfor university research science and social science departments, for which ViennaCircle offshoots such as Hempel made careers writing methodological752 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscanons.47 Anti-Nazi feeling coincided with the positivist ideology—most vehementlyexpressed in Popper’s book The Open Society and Its Enemies—thatmetaphysics is not only nonsensical but dangerous. The fact that Husserlianphenomenologists too had gone into exile, and that French existentialists wereactive as Resistance fighters, should have neutralized some of this politicalanimus; but the anticommunism of the cold war broadened the doctrine tocount all extremisms as pernicious.At its core, the anti-metaphysical movement was an internal battle in thedisciplinary politics of philosophers; that the analytical camp was able to gainexternal allies on political grounds gave extra heat to the conflict. The politicalname-calling imported at midcentury into internal struggles among philosophicalfactions became a generalized technique, used in turn by the self-styled“post-positivist” movements from the 1960s onward, when political tidesshifted and analytical hegemony weakened in its former strongholds. But evenhere, the hostility of phenomenologist-existentialist-deconstructionist lineagesto their analytical rivals is not merely or even primarily an expression ofexternal political hostilities. For at the same time that logical positivism andordinary language were originally condemning the meaninglessness of metaphysics,the camp of phenomenology, religious neo-orthodoxy, and their allieswere developing their own condemnations of naturalism and scientism. Thedeeper factional divisions which still exist at the turn of the twenty-first centuryare the same as those which emerged with the realignment at the turn of thetwentieth; there has been no subsequent realignment, although some edges haveblurred and factional names have changed.In reality, the two allegedly antithetical traditions are network cousins, fullof common ancestors two and three generations back. All sides of the realigningfactions of the twentieth century emerged from the struggles over thefoundations of mathematics at the turn of the century. Working from muchthe same heritage of problems, the several branches have tended to movein parallel in their basic conceptual shifts. In the development of act psychologyand phenomenology from Brentano to Husserl to Heidegger, we see aparallel to the exploration of logical hierarchies: the sequence from Frege’s useversus mention, through Russell’s theory of types, to Wittgenstein’s sayingversus showing resembles the successive uncovering of levels of epochê and theexistentialist repudiation of traditional ontological language, like a melodyplayed in a different key.48