Epilogue:Sociological RealismIt is often supposed that social constructivism undermines truth. If reality issocially constructed, there is no objectivity and no reality. I deny the conclusion.Social constructivism is sociological realism; and sociological realismcarries with it a wide range of realist consequences.The Sociological CogitoThe philosophically strongest argument is traditionally that which is selfgrounding,certain in itself, without appeal to empirical observation. Theclassic argument of this kind, the cogito, seeks irrefutable truths by passingstatements through the acid bath of doubt. “I am thinking” is irrefutablebecause “I am not thinking” nevertheless displays oneself thinking.The familiar conclusion from the cogito is the existence of the self. This isnot the most useful path of argument. The self which is proven is ambiguous,conceivably only momentary and insubstantial. Consider what else is provenby the cogito. First of all, time exists. To doubt this (“time does not exist”) isto make a statement in time. Conscious thinking occupies the saddleback ofthe present, merging imperceptibly with past and future.Second, thinking exists. This thinking which is irrefutably proven takesplace in language; it constitutes a kind of conversation, myself saying somethingto myself.1 The cogito reveals a speaker and an audience. Denial provesit. To think to oneself “there is no one speaking” is uttered by a speaker; “thereis no audience for this statement” is received by an audience. Thinking has asocial form.We have not yet proved the existence of other people. This too is given byverbal thinking. Language takes place in words which carry meaning, and858follows a grammar which is to a large degree inescapable if statements are tomake sense. I do not invent my own language; my thinking depends on formswhich have come to me ready-made, from beyond the present moment ofconsciousness. The constraints of language use, along with its capability forconveying meaning, imply the existence of communicative beings beyond myself. To deny that other people exist—in this specific sense—is to deny thecommunicability and objectivity, indeed the meaningfulness, of one’s ownsentences.The reality of other people also may be derived from another aspect of thelanguage in which we think. Words are to a large extent universals. Concepts(except for indexicals) transcend particulars; they enable one to refer to anobject or a quality as appearing over again in time and in different contexts;in short, they are generalized. Apply the test of doubt: “Universals do not exist”is a statement making use of universals. But a general concept implies ageneralized viewpoint. A merely fragmentary, temporal sliver of consciousnesscannot refer to an experience as “a tree,” or even as “that tree again”; it mustbe a consciousness which involves both continuity and generality. How canmy particular fleeting experience give rise to the idea of universals? It mustcome to me from outside.The existence of universals implies the existence of society. A concept carrieswith it a social stance: not merely of some one other person, but an openand universalizing viewpoint of a plurality of other persons. Just how manypeople this implies is not given. It is more than two; in fact it must be explicitlyunspecified how many it comprises, since concepts imply meaningfulness forany and every personal stance at all. The concepts which go through one’smind are more than fleeting, having significance over and above my particularmoment of thinking. Generality of perspective is at the core of our capacity tothink; and this generality implies a collective, omnipresent social viewpoint.Third, space exists. Although space is not one of the items primordiallygiven through the sociological cogito, it may be quickly derived. If there areother people, not identical with one another in their particularity, they mustexist outside one another. This existing outside cannot be merely in time, sincetime is a single dimension which does not itself provide room for simultaneousplurality. There must be some other dimension in which the multiplicity ofselves exists; and we can call this dimension space.2We now have the existence of the time-space world as a firm reality. Thisis the material world of obdurate objects in ordinary experience, externallyresistant to one another. One of these objects, the most certain of all, is one’sown body. A plurality of selves exists, outside one another in space. There aredivisions between me and them; this barrier, as experienced from the inside, isEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 859my body. Another argument to the same effect (courtesy of Maine de Biran):I feel resistance to my will; this resistance is the materiality of time-spaceexistence, which meets me first of all as the presence of my body.The sociological cogito thus gives us assurance of several items of reality:thinking, language, other people, time and space, material bodies. This is notto say that illusions do not exist, or that mistakes cannot be made aboutparticular things of this kind. But perceptual illusions and other mistakes canbe discovered and rectified in the usual ways; particular errors occur within aframework of social language, time, and space, and do not call the reality ofthe framework into question. This can be demonstrated by the method ofCartesian doubt. To say “this is not a real person but a showroom dummy (ora computer)” is nevertheless to affirm that language exists, with its social basisand so forth. The possibility that I am dreaming when I make these statementsis nevertheless formulated in sentences, with the same consequences; whetherI am dreaming or not at this particular moment, language and society neverthelessexist.3We seem to have drifted beyond the borders of strictly a priori argument.My arguments as to what is beyond doubt, what survives its own refutation,have led to asserting the existence of the realm of empirical experience. Thisseems inevitable. The distinction between purely conceptual thinking andempirical experience is not absolute, and indeed is hard to pin down precisely.Especially when one affirms a sociological view of thinking, there are regionswhere the empirical and the conceptual fuse; for example, this fusion takesplace in every particular moment of the experience of thinking. The procedureof Cartesian doubt is a methodological game; we use it for the sake ofargument, granting one’s imaginary skeptical opponent the maximal possibleconcessions, to show what can be established at the highest level of certainty.Peirce held that Cartesian doubt is impossible, since in fact one never reallydoubts everything, but only focuses the beam of a targeted doubt on somespecific points. Peirce meant that the Cartesian philosopher is already immersedin a stream of language. I have been drawing out the sociological realistimplications of this immersion.Let us now pass beyond the methodological cogito. A second methodologicalprinciple can guide us: we are always in medias res, in the middle of things.We always find ourselves in the midst of time, space, discourse, other people.In medias res means that our thinking is always preceded by other thinking,our own and other people’s. Wherever we are is always a region from whichspace stretches out toward an indefinite horizon. In medias res is a primalexperience, before we begin to probe for precision. The history of philosophy,and of mathematics, is full of deep troubles which arise in the search for precise860 • Meta-reflectionsborders and for outer limits. Difficulties arise with the infinitesimal and theinfinite in time and space, and conceptually with the foundational, the firstprinciple and the ultimate argument. Troubles appear because these formulationstoo arise in medias res.In medias res can be taken as an empirical observation. It nevertheless isof a high order of generality, since there appear to be no exceptions. In mediasres seems also to be part of an inescapable conceptual framework, a region inwhich the empirical and conceptual fuse.4Consider then from the empirical side the argument which I have beenmaking for sociological realism. Whence did I get the ideas of the precedingparagraphs, to mount just this line of argument about a sociological cogito?Obviously, from the preceding chapters of this book, and from the empiricaland theoretical work of the networks of philosophers and sociologists whichhave been its materials. I have not crawled into a stove, like Descartes, suddenlyand inexplicably resolving to doubt everything, then spontaneously discoveringthat I cannot doubt that I am thinking in a social language. I have constructedthis argument by assimilating the arguments of intellectual networks whosehistory stretches back for generations. It would be artificial to deny the existenceof those historical networks, not only as ideas unfolding in time, but alsoas bodies of real human beings living in material space. Since I take my ownargument seriously, I must agree that I am thinking an internal conversationwhich attempts to construct a coalition of intellectual audiences, and that theemotional energies which animate my writing come from my own experiencesin intellectual networks. The immediate reality of my own activity implies thereality of a larger world of discourse, society, and bodily existence.And there is no justification for drawing any sharp borders as to whatrealities are supported by this admission. I cannot deny the reality of intellectualnetworks; and I can find no reason for supposing that these networksalone have existed, a thin band of historical existence threading back acrossthe centuries, without a wider social and material world surrounding them.The social constructivist theory of intellectual life, far from being anti-realist,gives us an abundance of realities. Social networks exist; so do theirmaterial bases, the churches and schools and the audiences and patrons whohave fed and clothed them; so do the economic, political, and geopoliticalprocesses which constituted the outer sphere of causality. These successivelayers of context for the minds of philosophers display no sharp borders. Thereis no criterion for arbitrarily stopping, for declaring that “I concede that socialreality exists; but the world of material nature does not.” It is all of a piece,all on the continuum in medias res.The conclusions that we arrive at by following the empirical pathway ofEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 861in medias res reinforce the a priori conclusions of the sociological cogito. Inboth directions, social constructivism leads to sociological realism.Virtually no one actually doubts the reality of the world of ordinaryexperience. It is only within specialized intellectual networks that the questionhas arisen whether this banal reality can be proven to a high standard ofargument; and even intellectuals, when they are “off duty,” go back to assumingthe reality of the ordinary time-space world. Sociological realism showsthat even within intellectual contention at its most reflexive, it is possible tosupport banal realism. It does not follow that every kind of ontological realityis thereby supported. There are several kinds of realism and anti-realism; letus see now what sociological realism implies for some of these non-ordinaryrealms.Sociological realism affirms mental and physical realities in human-sizedtime and space. Problems arise when statements are made about realitiesbeyond the human-sized world. These include the objects of science, insofaras these are entities or structures which are not observed by the naked eye oracted upon by the unaided limbs; the concepts of mathematics; conceptual orabstract reality per se, ideas and especially universals; the mind, taken as anentity or substance. A variety of positions have been taken as to these things,either to deny their reality or to affirm that they have a higher reality thanordinary experience. These positions, denying or transcending banal reality,have been produced by intellectual networks, whose struggles for innovationin their argumentative attention space have repeatedly pushed beyond thehuman-sized world.Mathematics as Communicative OperationsMathematics is social discourse. The fact is inescapable if we straightforwardlyexamine what is given. Here is a mathematical argument of slight technicalcomplexity:(1) a  bx  cy(2) a  bx  cy  0The sequence of statements is true, and meaningful, for me only because Iknow what the symbols mean, and I know the acceptable procedures formanipulating them, so that equation (1) becomes equation (2). The symbols,like any other form of discourse, imply communication. This modest statementof mathematical abstraction implies that I have had contact with a network ofteachers, no doubt many links removed from those who originated this mathematics.Let us take an example from a higher level of abstraction (Kline, 1972:1128):862 • Meta-reflectionsIf Aik is a component of a covariant tensor of rank 2, then its covariantderivative with respect to xl is given byAik,l  ∂Aik∂x1 Σj = 1n{il,j}Ajk  Σj = 1n{kl,j}Aij.The network of mathematicians now becomes more restricted; at some level itis limited to the network of active mathematicians who are creating theresearch front of mathematical truths.For comparison, consider a statement made in the Chinese mathematics ofthe Sung dynasty algebra in Figure E.1. The difficulty is not merely that we (ifwe are Westerners) do not know the individual symbols in the same way thatWesterners usually cannot understand the equation 4  5  9 if it is writtenbut that we do not know the operations determining how these markers areto be manipulated. Chinese mathematics was performed on a counting boarddivided into squares (depicted in this text as a series of 3  3 or 3  4 matrices,depending on how much of the counting board was used). The Sung algebra,called the “celestial element method,” was a set of procedures for representingexpressions of constants and unknowns raised to various degrees by placingnumber signs in particular places on the board surrounding the central element.For example, in conventional modern European notation, the frame in themiddle of the first column on the right can be stated as xy2  120y  2xy 2x2  2x. The Chinese ideographs between the frames are an argument inwords (read from top to bottom and right to left), explaining how one algebraicexpression is to be transformed into another. This is a verbal rendition ofmathematical results; in actual practice, the mathematician uses a set of standardprocedures for manipulating the counters on the board and thereby transformingone expression into another. The physical operations and the symbolicstructure (not just the individual symbols) are different from the Cartesian rulesfor moving expressions from one side an equal sign () to another; thesimilarity is in the overall form of the practice, which allows derivation ofstrings of mathematical expressions from one another.A Platonist would say that the form of statement is irrelevant; that thederivation from one mathematical expression to another is true, no matter ifit is written in verbal argument in Latin, in post-Cartesian symbolism, in Sungalgebra, or anything else. But Platonism is merely a theory; it assumes whathas to be proven, that mathematical truths exist somewhere in a realm thathas nothing to do with the human activities of making mathematical statements.One may show this with a mathematical quasi-cogito: if I deny that amathematical statement must exist in the form of some particular kind ofEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 863FIGURE E.1. SUNG DYNASTY CELESTIAL ELEMENT ALGEBRA(Source: Needham, 1959: 131)864 • Meta-reflections[To view this image, refer tothe print version of this title.]discourse, in the very saying I display a statement in a discourse. If I fall backon asserting that mathematics must be transcendent because it can be translatedfrom one language to another, I rest my claim on the existence of translations,operations which connect several discourses together; this not only does notescape from discourse but adds yet another kind of discourse.5Mathematics has a social reality in that it is inescapably a discourse withina social community. This might seem a minimal kind of reality. We should notassume, however, that social discourse has no objective, obdurate quality, thekind of strong constraint that answers the concept of “truth.” To show whymathematical discourse has this quality, we must explore the distinctive characterof mathematical networks.Mathematical networks are historically linked backwards to previousmathematicians. This is so not merely in the genealogical sense typical of allcreative intellectuals, that the central network of famous creators in onegeneration typically spawns the next generation of discoverers. Mathematiciansare distinctively focused on their history, insofar as the main path ofmathematical discovery is to make a topic out of the methods used in aprevious level of mathematics, to formulate a symbolism which makes explicitsome operations previously tacitly assumed, and to explore the implications ofthe higher order of abstract symbolism. Algebra generalizes the rules of arithmetic,formulating methods whereby entire classes of arithmetical problemscan be solved. Successively higher levels of algebra produce general rules aboutthe solvability of various kinds of algebraic equations. Similar sequences haveoccurred in analysis, number theory, geometry, and their various hybrids.Over the course of such sequences, new concepts are created which abstractand summarize whole classes of previous work. The conventional algebraicsymbols for unknowns, x, y, stand for any number whatsoever; at a higherlevel, the function sign f(x) stands for entire expressions of whatever form.Functions of functions abstract still further; so do groups, rings, fields, and soforth. It matters not if what is abstracted is taken to be a number, an unknown,or an operation; on a higher level, the operations of conventional arithmeticare abstracted into a class of operations, which may be selected and elaboratedin various ways to give rise to alternative arithmetics, alternative algebras—inshort, the pathway to higher mathematics.Mathematics is the most historical of disciplines in the sense that its centraltopic is digging backwards into what is taken for granted in its previous work.Algebra not only implies arithmetic; and higher levels of algebra, of analysis,and so forth, not only imply the previously investigated lower levels of abstractionin these fields. The symbolism of mathematics at any point in its historyrefers to the kinds of operations which were carried out in the earlier mathematics.It is impossible to escape from the historical accumulation of previousEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 865results, embedded in the meaning of any particular mathematical expression.The history of mathematics is embodied in its symbolism.After Descartes, the machinery of manipulating equations has consisted inprocedures for transferring symbols from one side of the equal sign to theother, and for rearranging terms until the equation takes the form of what wasto be proven. A key to this method is reversibility. The results of operationsmay be taken as starting points, by assigning them symbols which can bemanipulated in the equation. The symbols for unknown numbers x, y whichsatisfy particular equations are treated as if they were already known; in thesame way, any other class of expressions, including those yet to be discovered,are represented as placeholders in the equation. The machinery is not impededby our ignorance of any particular fact; by the method of symbolizing wholeclasses, including both past results, future results, perhaps even unattainableor impossible results, it is possible to set in motion the procedures of manipulatingequations, and to come to conclusions which reveal how its terms arerelated.In one sense the symbolism is a reification. It treats items as if they werethings, by symbolizing them in a thing-like way; it gives apparent solidity tothis x, or this f(x), which is yet another temptation to treat the objects ofmathematics as if they were Platonic realities. But this reification is provisionalonly, for the sake of proceeding with the technology of manipulating equations.The symbolism belongs to an ongoing history. It points both backwards andforwards: backwards because the most obvious referent of a symbolic placeholderis something of the kind which has already been found on a moreconcrete level. The x may be replaced with a number which solves an arithmeticproblem; the f(x) may be exemplified by some particular algebraic expression.And because the symbolism is abstract and general, it points forward to largerclasses of mathematics: not only to all the particular unknowns which mightbe substituted for a symbol, but outward toward the space of abstract possibilitiesin a cognate family of operations. In this way the formulation of newsymbolism—which always means new systems of practice, procedures formanipulating a collection of symbols—opens up new areas of discovery, higherorders of mathematics to be investigated. Successive orders of symbolism thuspoint not only backwards to previous work in which they are grounded, butalso onward to new kinds of problems.Mathematics is social, then, in two successively stronger senses: Anyonewho performs mathematics even to the extent of understanding an equationin elementary arithmetic is engaged in a form of social discourse and a networkof teachers and discoverers. And symbols and procedures which make upmathematics reflexively embody the history of that creative network all the866 • Meta-reflectionsway back to its earliest links; self-reflection on its own prior operations is itselfthe edifice of higher mathematics.Let us underline a further aspect which demonstrates that mathematics isthoroughly social. The topic of mathematics is operations, not things. It is nota field which examines what kinds of things exist in the world, or somehowin a world beyond the world. Return to the ground zero of mathematics,numbers. Because a number may be treated as a noun in a sentence, it is easyto assume it is a thing. But the primitive of number is simply counting; itconsists in making gestures, verbal or otherwise, toward something whiletelling off a sequence, “1, 2, 3 . . .” The answer to “How many?” is thenumber that one stops with when one’s gesturing to each in turn is complete.Numbers are primordially the activity or operation of numbering.In this respect, numbers are like other symbols which make up human discourse.Their universality comes from their universal use, not from any characterof the objects on which they are used. Numbering is a process of dividingand pointing. It may be applied to anything: to material objects which mayhave obvious separations among them, but also to things whose outlines arevague and shifting (clouds, for instance), or indeed to “things” which are notthings at all, which may be operations or abstractions or imaginations. Numberingis the operation of making items equivalent by counting them off; theybecome items because they are treated as such. This does not mean thatnumbers are illusions. They are real, as operations carried out by humanbeings, activities carried out in time and spatial location. They are also generalizable,transferable from one situation to another, because they are operationswhich we can apply over and over again. Their generality comes from theirbeing operations of human discourse.The operations of mathematics are social, from the primitive level of countingon up. It is not merely that we learn to count by being taught by others,and that the skill of counting is extremely widespread in most societies. Theprinciples of the sociology of mind apply. Counting can be an overt socialactivity: I count these things in front of us, I invite you to count them as well,or to accept my count because if you follow the same procedure, you will cometo the same conclusion.6 Since conceptual thinking is internalized from externaldiscourse, and takes its meaning only because it implies an external audience,counting which I do for myself alone is also an operation within a social frame.And the conclusion reached earlier may be repeated in this instance: countingproduces universals because it takes a universal stance, the stance of anyoneat all who follows this convention of discourse.What has been said about counting may be said again about each of thesuccessively more abstract forms of mathematics. Arithmetic generalizes theEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 867results of counting: adding gives rules or shortcuts as to what will happen ifone counts first one group, then another, then counts them both, and so forth.Elementary algebra generalizes the results from various kinds of arithmeticproblems. There is a generalizing, and reflexive, chain from one form of mathematicsto another, from the operations of counting up through the study ofoperations upon operations which are raised to intricate degrees in abstractmath. At each level mathematics investigates and classifies operations. It makesoperations equivalent to one another by treating them as equivalent, by subjectingthem to a systematic set of higher-order operations. We make the numbersof a counting system equivalent by imposing the conventions of addingand subtracting them. For mathematics, there are no problems of mixing applesand oranges; the mathematician coins a new concept of that which is equivalentamong them. Nor need that equivalent be a “natural kind,” a concept in rebus(e.g., fruit), but just that equivalence which is given by the operation imposedon them. If counting consists in making a series of gestures which therebyconstitutes something as a series, arithmetic consists in making gestures towardnumber operations, elementary algebra in making gestures toward arithmeticoperations, higher algebra in making gestures toward elementary algebraicoperations which treat them as equivalent.These gestures are made in common with others in the community of mathematicians.One becomes a member by adopting its conventions of communication.The social structure of mathematics is pyramid-shaped. Across the base,there is the huge community of those who use the conventions of counting andof arithmetic. Building step-wise upon this are the communities of increasinglyspecialized and esoteric mathematicians, networks which have taken the lowerlevelcommunicative operations, the lower-level conventions, as topics forabstraction and reflexive generalization.Mathematical objects are real in the same sense that human communicationis real. It is the reality of activities of real human beings, carried out in time,located in space. And it is the doubly strong, obdurate reality of the social: ofwidespread conventions of discourse, which is to say activities carried out incommon, and which constitute a community out of just those persons whoadopt these conventional operations. We may even say it is triply strong, sincethe network of mathematicians is that which has grown up around the centralactivity of constructing techniques of building meta-operations which take ascontent the previous operations of the community.The long-standing view of mathematics as a realm of Platonic ideals ismistaken. Some Greeks philosophers and mathematicians argued that theobjects of mathematics must be ideal because the truths they proved aboutgeometric figures referred to ideal circles and lines, not to the imperfectly drawnlines on the sand.7 Others have argued for the ideality of mathematics by using868 • Meta-reflectionsempiricism as a foil; numbers are not the things we observe in the world, sinceit is by numbers that we can enumerate things. Both lines of argument makethe same mistake (and so does that which holds that mathematics arises byinduction from experience of things): assuming that reality must consist eitherin substantive things or in self-subsistent ideas. But mathematical concepts areneither; they are emblems for actions, for operations of mathematical discourse.Universals and ideals are activities of social discourse; they are as realas that discourse, which is to say as real as the ordinary human-sized worldof action. There is no need to assign them to another world.Another mistake is to interpret mathematics as consisting in tautologies.The identity between those items on opposite sides of the equal sign in amathematical equation is not the same kind of identity as that establishedby giving something a name; it is not the empty tautology exemplified byexplaining “gravity” as “the propensity to fall.” Mathematical equivalence andverbal tautology are embedded in different language games, in different systemsof operations. The arbitrary tautologies of ordinary language lead nowhere;mathematical procedure is a discovery-making machine. The machinery ofmathematical equations operates in multiple directions, as Frege noted indistinguishing sense and reference. The equivalence-making conventions ofmathematics open up successive classes of abstract operations whose propertiescan be investigated. Conventions are arbitrary, but discovery in mathematicsconsists in exploring the patterns opened up by adopting various kinds ofconventions. Mathematics is a special field of empirical discovery, insofar as“empirical” means investigation of experience in time; it is the experience ofthe mathematical network of investigating what is implied in the symbolicconventions it adopts.The theories that mathematics must be a transcendent realm of Platonicobjects, or at least the a priori truths inherent in tautologies, are attractivebecause they help explain the feeling that mathematics is certain, that its resultsare as high and irrefutable a level of truth as humans can attain. This certaintycan be explained by the special social character of mathematical networks.Because the contents of mathematics are chained together over time, from themost rarefied abstractions back to the ordinary operations of counting, theedifice is tied together at an awesome level of tightness. It is not simply thatresults are lazily passed along from one generation to the next, as a long-standingtraditional paradigm which no one bothers to question. On the contrary,the linkage is deep and inescapable, since the topics of successively moreabstract mathematics have been the underlying patterns of the operations ofprevious mathematics. Mathematics embodies its history, in its procedures forusing symbolism, to a degree found in no other field. The most naive practitionerproduces the same results as everyone else, because anyone who learnsEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 869to follow the conventions can repeat the chain of argument. Mathematics iscertain because it is repeatable and reliable, and these consist in the repeatabilityof a chain of social conventions.The Objects of Rapid-Discovery ScienceSocial constructivism in the sociology of science is generally associated withan anti-realist position as to the entities of science. Let us see to what extentthis is justified. The activity of natural science, if not the name, has existed inintellectual networks in many parts of the world since ancient times. Throughoutmost of history (as Chapter 10 has described) these networks were subjectto the law of small numbers, dividing into opposing positions within astronomy,medical physiology, even mathematics. The entities of science constitutedmultiple and competing realities for the networks that conceived them. In theEuropean generations between 1500 and 1700, a branch of intellectual networksreorganized in such a way that science changed its character: it becamerapid-discovery science, which eventually acquired a high degree of consensus.The network shifted attention toward a train of forward-moving discoveries.Disputes became more short-lived, rarely lasting beyond a generation. Thedivision among opposing positions under the law of small numbers was truncatedinto a temporary disagreement at the research front, which was repeatedlyput behind as attention moved onward to the next round of discoveries.What I have just described is on the level of the social reality of thesenetworks of scientists; it refers to the entities of science only insofar as theyare contents asserted, disputed, accepted, and passed along by the network.The network of scientists at the time of the rapid-discovery revolution waslargely a branch of the long-standing philosophical network. Gradually splittingoff from the philosophers, the scientific network became in its own spherea double network: on one side a network of intellectuals, chains of mastersand pupils; on the other side chains of research equipment, modified from onegeneration to the next.The genealogies of research technology are carried along by the humannetwork; it is living persons who modify lenses into telescopes and microscopes,and thence into the laboratory equipment of optics and spectrography.Both kinds of networks are parasitical on one another. The rapid movementof research equipment from one modification to the next is the key to the modeof rapid discovery in which scientists have so much confidence; they feel thatdiscoveries are there to be made along a certain angle of research because theprevious generation of equipment has turned up phenomena which are suitablefor the intellectual life of the human network. The favored part of the scientificnetwork is that part which has closest access to the previous generation of870 • Meta-reflectionssuccessful discovery-making equipment; these persons are in a position to refineor modify the equipment to extend past lines of discovery-making. This appliesboth to the accretion of small discoveries within a successful paradigm, whichgenerally takes place by small modifications or extensions of the applicationof existing technique, and to major new lines of discovery, which typically ariseby the cross-breeding of lines of equipment or by the invention of radicallynew research technology: the development of the electrical battery and itscombination with the equipment of chemical experiment, and thence with theequipment of astronomy, and so onward.8 There is no apparent limit to thisprocess in time; the combinatorial cross-breeding of research equipment genealogieswill apparently continue to generate phenomena for scientific discoveriesas long as social networks exist to promote the equipment genealogies.The lineages of research equipment are real, in the sense in which the worldof human-sized objects in time and space is real. They are lineages of materialthings. The interpretation is sometimes made that scientific experiments areembodied theories, that research equipment has a primarily mental reality. Thisseriously overstates the case. The genealogy of equipment is carried along bya network of scientific intellectuals who cultivate and cross-breed their technologicalcrops in order to produce empirical results which can be grafted ontoan ongoing lineage of intellectual arguments. This is not to say that scientistsalways experiment in the light of theories which give a supportable interpretationof what their equipment is doing. Tinkering with the equipment, crossbreedingit, or initially inventing it may be done with very little sense of thetheoretical issues that later develop out of it and provide a retrospectivetheoretical interpretation of what the equipment is doing. Whether scientificintellectuals have a clear and defensible theoretical conception of their equipmentor not, they engage in practical bodily action whenever they use equipment.The network of scientists acts in the banal material time-space world,and the theoretical entities which they discuss and pass along as the contentsof their science are grounded in this human-sized world of human bodies andresearch equipment.What then is the reality of the theoretical entities of science? As invisiblestructures or substances they are prey to all the philosophical troubles whicharise whenever one attempts to step out of in medias res and into a realm ofperfect precision and enduring substantiality. Nevertheless, this does not makethem necessarily illusory or unreal. Theoretical constructs can acquire anobdurate quality like that of the world of banal reality because they are linkedwith it in at least two ways. They are a real focus of attention and, over time,of consensus within a real network of scientists. This social consensus is of adistinctive kind, oriented toward a lineage of discoveries about obdurate reality,because scientific entities are also grounded in the material genealogies ofEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 871research equipment; though scientific entities have an intellectual side, they alsohave a non-intellectual side, phenomena which arise from the ways in whichthis equipment behaves.Both of these links to banal reality of human-sized material experienceextend outward in time; both have generations of predecessors, and both carryalong the prior experience of past generations; both imply what practices willwork again in the future. This is particularly strong in the equipment genealogy;research technologies have been manipulated and modified just so thatthey give repeatable results. The stability of scientific entities is the counterparton the intellectual plane of the stability which has been created in practice inthe equipment of research. One can regard this as stability in the interactionbetween the bodies of experimenters and the equipment. The perfection of theequipment, and the stabilization of a theoretical entity (an electron, let us say),rests on the way in which the genealogy of equipment has become successivelyeasier to manipulate. This reaches a very high degree when the standardizedequipment, or some offspring of it, is shipped out of the laboratory; electriccircuits become wiring manipulated by millions of people in everyday life;electromagnetic wave detectors become radio receivers. When this occurs, thehuman social network which hosts the theoretical entity gives it a seeminglyirreproachable reality. The specialized intellectual network, prone to creatingthe esoterica of the non-ordinary world, fades from presence; electricity becomesso closely tied to the unquestionable realities of human bodies and thehuman-sized things that surround them that it comes to seem continuous withordinary reality.And indeed in a sense it is. Although we are rarely conscious of the fact,the electric switches, batteries, wave detectors, and so forth are the currentgeneration of a long trail of previous equipment whose youth was spent in thegenealogies of laboratories. It is this long train, extending backwards andforwards through time, that makes some scientific entities so obdurate; theyare so tightly and multiply linked to ordinary reality that it is hard to separatethem from it.The obdurate reality acquired by some entities of science comes more fromtheir material grounding in equipment than from their theoretical conceptualization.Electricity has had a widespread practical reality since about 1850,9while its theoretical interpretation within the core of the research networkhas changed several times. In the same way, modern conceptions of the elementarycomponents of chemistry and physics have changed over the generationsfrom atoms to electron orbits to successive reorderings of families ofsubatomic particles and anti-particles to strings; an examination of the standardtextbooks at intervals of 30 years suggests a pattern of ongoing evolutionand no reason to suppose that today’s entities will be accepted as more than872 • Meta-reflectionscrude approximations at some time in the future.10 This historical fluidity ofthe conceptual constructions of science is what we should expect from competitiveintellectual networks. The stability and obdurate reality of “electricity,”“bacterial infection,” and other now familiar entities are guaranteed bytheir embeddedness in genealogies of material practice which have spreadamong non-intellectuals. The superior reality accorded to the conceptions ofrapid-discovery science comes from the way in which the dual, mutuallyparasitical networks of that community, the equipment genealogies and thehuman intellectuals, have spawned a third branch, equipment genealogies,which have found a home apart from the incessantly frontier-seeking ideacontest of the intellectuals. It matters not how the esoteric intellectual frontierat the moment interprets “electricity”; the unexamined word serves as a markerfor an obdurate reality of everyday life.The social construction of scientific entities leads to at least quasi-realism.Although not all scientific entities, as intellectual constructs, have the sameclaim to be regarded as real, some of them are so closely entwined withhuman-sized banal reality that the borderline is difficult to draw. Althoughtheir epistemological justification is more complex than the irrefutable realitiesof immediate social experience, they are at least close kin.How is it possible that mathematics is so often found applicable to thenatural, non-human, non-symbolic world? Why has it become so useful inscience? It is not so mysterious once we see the force of the point thatmathematics arises in social networks which are part of the natural world. Thedistinctiveness of the network of mathematical practitioners is that they focustheir attention on the pure, contentless forms of human communicative operations:on the gestures of marking items as equivalent and of ordering them inseries, and on the higher-order operations which reflexively investigate thecombinations of such operations. The primal operations—counting, measuring—begin as gestures toward the ordinary human-sized bodily objects andactivities of time-space reality. Such activities have the same quality of realityas anything else on the level of this ordinary banal world. The abstractmathematics which arises reflexively on these operations remains part of thenatural world; in fact it is an empirical investigation of an aspect of that naturalworld, the part which consists in the communicative activities of mathematiciansas they create new forms of operating on their prior operations. Mathematicsarises in medias res, and it maintains a smooth continuity from onelevel of its own abstraction to another. There is no sharp boundary betweenthe objects of mathematics and the world of natural science. The scientificapplicability of mathematical procedures should not be surprising.High consensus over the objects of science arises only in rapid-discoverynetworks; and these in turn are composed of mutually parasitical relationshipsEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 873between genealogies of research equipment and the argumentative network ofscientific intellectuals. Mathematical rapid-discovery science adds a third network,the lineage of techniques for manipulating formal symbols representingclasses of communicative operations. Mathematics does not provide a magicaleye by which we see the transcendently existing objects behind the phenomenalsurface of experience, the invisible entities of scientific theories. Mathematicsis connected to the other two networks in the phenomenal world of experience.On one side, the measurements given by the research equipment are madeinto mathematical realities because humans use them as markers, in the samesense that the primitive mathematical operation of counting is the socialprocedure of gesturing toward (and thereby setting equivalent) items of experience.As Searle (1992) would say, there is no homunculus in the researchequipment; it is the human mathematicians who use equipment as extensionsof their own capacity for making gestures. These are gestures simultaneouslytoward the non-human world and toward the social community, which hasbuilt up a repertoire of reliable methods of transforming one set of symbolicgestures into another.On the other side, the genealogy of mathematical techniques connects tothe network of scientific intellectuals, which constructs the meaningful objectsand arguments which make up the humanly familiar contents of science.Equipment genealogies produce phenomena in the world of experience; scientificintellectuals turn these phenomena into interpretations, useful for winningarguments and setting off the network onto yet further topics of investigation.The “invisible” world of scientific entities comes from the intellectuals, notdirectly from the equipment. Mathematical technique becomes important forscientists because it enables them to give an especially obdurate character toat least parts of their arguments; but this is the obdurate reality of certainchains of reflexive communicative operations, which it has been the businessof mathematicians to investigate. The crystal-hard social reality of mathematicsgives backbone to the socially negotiated arguments of scientific coalitions.Mathematics is a bridge: it shares with the scientific network the characterof being social; it shares with equipment genealogies the character of being alineage of techniques. Since the lineage of mathematical technique is a lineageof discoveries about processes in time-space reality (i.e., about mathematicaloperations), it meshes well with equipment-generated phenomena which aremulti-dimensional processes, whose form cannot be interpreted on the lowlevels of abstraction and reflexivity encountered in ordinary noun-adjectiveverbgrammar or ordinary arithmetic. (That is why the investigation of higheralgebras—quaternions, vectors, matrices—was so fruitful for the developmentof modern physics.) Here again we find the social reality of mathematics874 • Meta-reflectionsblending seamlessly with the non-human natural reality of equipment-generatedphenomena.The core social network in science remains that of the human intellectuals.Science, to be successful, ultimately issues in words and imagery. A purelymathematical enterprise such as string theory does not acquire full, sociallyaccepted “reality” until there is a verbal interpretation of its main points, whichtranslates them into the familiar noun-like “entities” which count as paramountreality in ordinary language. But here we should note that mathematicstoo is embedded in words.11 This reminds us that “mathematics” is twonetworks in one, a genealogy of techniques and a human network which bothknows how to work the techniques and engages in the usual intellectual contestof setting arguments for one another. Verbal discourse is the most encompassingframe, the home ground of intellectual life. If mathematics is an importantbridge among the human and non-human networks which constitute science,it is because mathematicians are hybrids sharing all the traits of humanness,from verbal discourse to their own special form of formal reflexiveness.Mathematics is simultaneously empirical and conceptual. It encompassesboth the observation of experience in time and space, which is always particularand situationally located. But it deals with the universal and general, indeedwith patterns which are irrefutably found among universal concepts, becauseits topic is the pure generality of human communicative operations. These arethe activities of making things equivalent, of transposing them for one another.The topic is universal because it comprises the operations of treating things asuniversals. It is simultaneously empirical, arising within experience and applicableto experience, because doing mathematics is an activity taking place intime and within a social network. The universal features of mathematics areempirically discovered, by the work of mathematicians investigating varioussystems of operations. The topic of mathematics is their system of communicativeconventions. What they discover about this is objective, obdurate reality.If we say it is socially constructed, it is an empirical investigation of theobdurate qualities of social construction. It is so real because it is so thoroughlysocially constructed.Why Should Intellectual Networks Undermine Themselves?A social constructivist theory of the intellectual world affirms several inescapablerealities: other people and their intercommunication, the time-space world,and human-sized material things with our own bodies among them. Mathematicsmakes discoveries about the obdurate realities of intellectual operations,the nested chains of gestures by which we designate equivalences and transformEpilogue: Sociological Realism • 875abstract statements into one another. Genealogies of scientific research equipmenthave become part of inescapable banal reality. The effectiveness of thisequipment in producing and reproducing special phenomena in ordinary timespace,which the network of scientific intellectuals interprets, ties the non-immediateentities of scientific theories closely, if not immediately, to ordinaryreality as well.How then does far-reaching doubt arise about so many of these realities?In part it simply continues the main dynamic of creativity, the law of smallnumbers. Intellectuals thrive on disagreement, dividing the attention space intothree to six factions, seeking lines of creativity by negating the chief tenets oftheir rivals, rearranging into alliances or fanning out into disagreements as thematerial base for one faction or another is strengthened or weakened. Conflictover the attention space is a fundamental social fact about intellectuals. Itfollows that intellectuals produce multiple competing views of reality. And thisdisagreement will go on in the future, as long as intellectual networks exist.Disagreement over fundamental realities has been normal in the intellectualworld ever since specialized networks appeared in ancient times; it is only inthe last dozen generations of modern European networks that a social structurehas arisen producing intellectual consensus on some topics. The network ofintellectuals has split into several branches: philosophers and general-purposeintellectuals, whose dynamics continue to be determined by the law of smallnumbers; rapid-discovery science, which developed out of a technique forevading the law of small numbers; and mathematicians, whose niche is acumulative, self-entwining investigation which builds a core of virtual certaintyin its lineage of knowledge. Besides these, in a limbo between rapid-discoveryscience and philosophy, are the disciplines of social science and humanisticscholarship; they resemble the natural sciences in taking topics of empirical(including historical) investigation, but share with philosophy the social organizationwhich produces intellectual fractionalization under the law of smallnumbers.As intellectual networks have continued to branch, especially with theaccelerating expansion of academic populations since 1900, criticism of thereality of the objects studied by particular branches has entered a new phase.Some branches take one another for their topics of investigation. These disciplinaryoverflows are a normal source of the expansion of knowledge. Creativityin philosophy since the academic revolution of the 1800s has been largelystimulated by the adjudication of new disciplinary boundaries. The emergenceof history of science, sociology of knowledge, the literary theory of textuality,along with many other actual and potential combinations, heightens thereflexivity of the intellectual community as a whole. The search for problems,for energizing points of attention and contention, which is the life of intellectual876 • Meta-reflectionsnetworks, has turned to exposing the inner truth claims of the various specializedbranches to the alternative perspectives of different branches.Much of the intellectual action now comes from cross-disciplinary clashes,but this sociological point is not yet an epistemological judgment on the realityof the objects that particular fields are studying. Analysis is not the same ascritique. Reflexivity per se is not necessarily self-undermining. To say “I amlying” is paradoxical; but to say “I am telling the truth” is not. Why then isit so easily assumed that sociological reflexivity undermines the truth of whateversocially produced knowledge it focuses upon?The widespread assumption is that truth is determined by reality; a statementis true because it meets the criteria of truth, not because of any otherreason. If truth is socially determined, then it cannot be determined by truthitself. This is like saying that one sees things accurately only if one sees withouteyeballs, as if knowing must take place without any human apparatus forknowing.Truth characterizes statements. Reality is that which makes statements true,but reality itself is neither true nor false; it simply is. Statements are inevitablyhuman; truth, when it exists, is inevitably a phenomenon of the human world.The abstract truths we are concerned with, found in the statements of intellectuals,arise in the specialized discourse of social networks. The very conceptionof truth, and the criteria by which truth is recognized, arise within humancommunities, and have been changed, abstracted, and refined over the generationsof intellectual networks. That is merely a historical fact. That conceptionsof truth are human, and historical, does not automatically divorce true statementsfrom reality.Truths do not arise in isolated brains or disembodied minds. The messageof this book is that mind is not a substance or an entity; the verbal thinkingwe are concerned with is an activity of overt and internal conversations.Thought is always linked in a flow of verbal gesture from human body to body,among mutually focused nervous systems, reverberating with shared rhythmsof attention. Its symbols represent general and abstract viewpoints becausethey are communicable markings, activities of taking the stance of all themembers of the network. Its arguments are energized by the emotional energyarising from the ritual density of interactions in the core of the intellectualnetworks, where disagreements are focused and alliances are made. The individualthinker, closeted in privacy, thinks something which is significant forthe network only because his or her inner conversation is part of the largerconversation and contributes to its problems. If a brain flickers and brightenswith statements which are true, this happens only because that brain is pulsingin connection with the past and anticipated future of a social network. Trutharises in social networks; it could not possibly arise anywhere else.Epilogue: Sociological Realism • 877The social construction of science does not undermine scientific truths. Intellectualnetworks are part of the time-space physical world; to say that socialnetworks produce science is only to say that the natural world gives rise toknowledge about the natural world. The social network of mathematiciansinvestigates the pure properties of human communication; human communicationis part of the natural world; again a part of reality investigates anddiscovers something about itself. Sociology and the other social and humanisticresearch disciplines, for all the layers of reflexivity that went into constructingtheir objects, nevertheless study something real precisely because their objectsare social.Social reflexivity outrages our assumptions only when we conceptualizeTruth as existing apart from people, or as the relation between a disembodied,featureless observing Mind and a sharply separate Reality. We have madeknowledge the equivalent of God in a transcendent religion. Durkheim putsthis into perspective: the highest sacred object, symbolized as God, is society.For intellectuals, the society which matters above all, which gives them theircreative energy and is the fount and arena of their ideas, is their own socialnetwork. The concept of transcendent Truth is an expression of the felt autonomyof the inner activities of the intellectual network.12The intrusion of sociological reflexivity is taken as an affront to a sacredobject of truth. This affront is felt most sharply by members of particularintellectual communities whose work is itself not very reflexive. As the disciplineshave differentiated, philosophy has taken as its terrain the discovery ofdeep troubles, which drive them along a sequence of increasing abstractionand reflexivity; the natural sciences have taken as their terrain the investigationof empirical topics with conceptions on moderate levels of abstraction. Sincetheir level of abstraction stays fairly constant, scientists are unconcerned withproblems of reflexivity, especially the deep troubles of high degrees of self-consciousnesswhich have been reached in philosophy since 1900. Sociologists ofknowledge have been hybrids from the philosophical networks, and thus haveshared their reflexivity, since the time of Scheler, Lukács, and Mannheim in the1920s, through the Wittgensteinian and ethnomethodological influence onsociology of science in the 1970s and 1980s.13 This reflexivity clashes with therelatively more concrete conceptions of scientists. Many scientists, especiallyas they display their findings to lay audiences (including politicians and industrieswho fund their research), speak about their theoretical objects as if theywere natural objects on the same level as the banal realities of everyday life.Sophisticated and pragmatically adept within their own research communities,scientists often adopt the stance of naive realism, amounting to reifying complexlymediated abstractions, when they communicate with outsiders.Some heat of the argument comes from embarrassment, above all in the878 • Meta-reflectionscase of the high-prestige wing of contemporary intellectuals, the scientists.Sociologists of science have stripped away the idealizations with which scientistshave traditionally presented their results, hiding their actual investigationand negotiation, as if they produced scientific truths untouched by humanhands. It does not necessarily follow that the dirty work of science, its ordinaryconstructive activities, undermines its truth. On the other side of the conflict,many sociologists have pursued the investigation of other disciplines in adebunking mood, again not sociologically surprising in that the social energiesof intellectual life come from uncovering lines of disagreement. To repeat theconclusions arrived at: social construction per se does not necessarily underminetruth, for there is no other way that true statements could arise than bythe activities of social networks. And since social constructivism is itself a formof realism, it can ally itself with realism in science and mathematics.This leaves a region of the intellectual world in which sociological realismmay not take us very far. The law of small numbers continues to determinethe pattern of creativity in philosophy, sociology, and other humanistic andsocial research disciplines. Does this mean that there is no single reality, notruth, in these fields?One way out of this conclusion is the possibility that multiple realities andcompeting truths will turn out to be complementary. We may hope that thesituation is that of the many blind men touching different parts of the sameelephant; more appropriately, since that image is too static, we may hope thatthe competing factions of philosophers or sociologists are pursuing multiplepaths of advance into the same wilderness. But it is also possible that this willnot be the case; a unified map may never be filled in because the paths maynever intersect.The social processes of intellectual life imply that the future will consist instill further fanning out rather than convergence. New topics are constructedby combining previous chains of intellectual work. The research topics andtheoretical perspectives of the previous generation can always be combined toyield new studies.14 Crossing disciplinary boundaries expands the possibilitiesstill further. Reflexive methods, treating a topic from the viewpoint of itshistory, of feminist critique, of its social production, of textual rhetoric, andother standpoints, results in further fanning out in the pattern of permutationsand combinations. Still more topics can be created as higher levels of abstractionand reflexivity, taken over from the long-term sequence of philosophicallife, make it possible to re-study earlier problems at successive levels of theabstraction-reflexivity sequence. The endless fanning out of intellectual combinationsdoes not happen mechanically, and does not exclude work thatwill be received as striking and insightful. There is a premium on being ableto crystallize new gestalts which bring ingredients together. And throughout,Epilogue: Sociological Realism • 879the law of small numbers dividing the attention space motivates creativity,sometimes of genuinely new positions, by negating key premises of opposingpositions.In practical reality there is no danger that future intellectuals will run outof topics for creativity. No matter how much mass higher education expandsin the future, with the rising tide of credential inflation, no matter how manyprofessors need to write articles and books for academic promotion, there willalways be topics to write about. The inverted pyramid of publications buildingon previous publications has no intrinsic limit.Does the widening combinatorial fan of intellectual productions mean thatthe humanities and social sciences of the future will diverge infinitely intomultiple realities? Social processes imply that intellectual atomization may notgo very far. Within any particular intellectual community, the law of smallnumbers limits how many positions can receive widespread attention. This stillcould leave us with half a dozen hermetically sealed viewpoints in each specialty.But borders will not be sharp, precisely because so many publicationsare constructed by combining ingredients from several previous lines of work.The larger the number of intellectuals all under pressure to publish originalwork, the more incentive there will be to range widely across borders in searchof new combinations.The sense of a common reality is fostered where the patches of intellectualproduction are stitched together piece by piece into a multi-patternedquilt. This does not produce the object-like reality in which all the intellectualsin a given faction share a single world frame, or posit the same kind ofworld substance whose characteristics they are all investigating. Combinatorialconstruction of intellectual topics, if unmitigated by other social features ofthe intellectual world, produces neither a central conception nor a limitingframe around what they believe they are studying. It nevertheless leads not toinfinitely fragmenting individual realities, but to a decentered network ofoverlapping realities.In philosophy, because its central terrain remains conceptual rather thanhistorical or empirical, the construction of multiple realities seems fated to anespecially strong form of divisiveness. Philosophy takes as its terrain thediscovery of deep troubles, self-propagating difficulties. These deep conceptualtroubles are the hidden treasures of first-rate philosophical creativity, thediscovery of which brings fame to those who bring them to light. To cultivatedeep troubles is to court disagreement. It is to keep the law of small numbersoperating, thereby bringing the focus of hard-fought argument which energizesconceptual advance.Yet even in the heart of philosophy there is a shared reality. The very conceptof a deep trouble combines an element of realism with its inevitable con-880 • Meta-reflectionssequence of splitting realities. Deep troubles are discovered by the network,not merely contrived; they are obdurate and unmalleable; they constrain andshape the path of the philosophical network across the generations. In the sameway, the sequence of abstraction and reflexivity, which socially underminesitself at high levels of self-reflection, also is an obdurate reality, a constraintwhich shapes the long-term pathway of the network. Abstraction and reflexivity,the terrain explored by this most acutely self-conscious and inwardlyturning of all networks, are real because they are activities arising throughthe historical existence of the social network itself. Even philosophy, the archetypalconflictual discipline under the law of small numbers, the field whosecreativity battens on self-propagating difficulties, makes discoveries about areality of its own.