CHAPTER 15£Sequence and Branch in theSocial Production of IdeasThe long-term tendency of an active intellectual community is to raise the levelof abstraction and reflexivity.The Continuum of Abstraction and ReflexivityIn China, the ancient Book of Poetry contains the yin and yang graphs, butonly in the concrete sense of shadow and light. It was the philosophers around265 b.c.e. who took such terms in the sense of generalized phenomena beyondeveryday concrete objects. From these building blocks the next three generationsof Chinese intellectuals constructed a cosmological system, with its cyclesand correspondences between the natural and the political world. Confucianshad begun by formulating abstract concepts for the moral realm, beginningwith li, proper ritual behavior, and abstracting into a generalized notion ofsocial and moral propriety. Further levels of abstraction emerged when philosophersturned their explicit attention to the nature of such concepts per se.The “Pure Conversation school,” ca. 235–300 c.e., was regarded as engagedin “dark learning” because its adherents subjected Taoist and Confucian textsto analysis, not for the familiar purposes of asserting the primacy of favoritecosmological and moral positions, but for rising to a metaphysical level indiscussing being, non-being, and substance.After the lapse of such discussions for many centuries, the Neo-Confuciansrevived the level of abstraction. Ch’eng Hao gave new meaning to li as“principle,” explicitly recognizing levels of abstraction. Chu Hsi identified liwith the cosmological origin T’ai Chi (Supreme Ultimate), while distinguishingit from the master substance ch’i (ether/energy), and recognizing the distinctionbetween logical and factual priority. Still later, in Tokugawa Japan at the timeof Ito Jinsai and Ogyu Sorai, Neo-Confucian metaphysics was subjected to yetfurther dissection. The fusion among moral principle and the cosmological and787abstract senses of li was now critiqued, the several realms explicitly separatedand opened for independent investigation.Reflexivity, the self-consciousness of intellectual operations, comes increasinglyto the fore as the intergenerational sequence lengthens. Levels of intellectualself-consciousness are potentially endless. Changes in the content of whatis reflected on change the form of possible reflexivity. There is some incipientreflexivity in the recognition by the Greek Sophists that concepts are namesgiven by human thought. More refined reflexivity occurs in Kant’s transcendentalcritique of the categories of the understanding. Building rapidly on thisstep, Fichte and Hegel’s dialectic made the process of increasing reflexivity intoa self-conscious topic. Even that recognition does not bring the sequence to anend. There have been post-Hegelian philosophies aplenty; the postmodernismof the 1980s was only one more signpost along this route. Such hyper-reflexivityis not merely the decadence of a particular branch of philosophy. Modernmathematics too exemplifies the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. The logicalformalist philosophy following from Frege’s revolution in logic similarly feedson itself, as we see from the subsequent history of Russell’s theory of types.The abstraction-reflexivity sequence has occurred in every part of thephilosophical world. It is produced by a basic dynamic of intellectual communities,on which are superimposed several other processes. The abstractionreflexivitysequence does not run off of its own accord as a self-propellingHegelian dialectic. In some world intellectual networks, the abstraction-reflexivitysequence extended further than in others; there have been periodswhen the sequence is arrested at a constant level of abstraction, and times whenit retrogresses to lower levels of concreteness and reification. There have beenside-branches, among them naturalism and empirical science, which at a certainpoint cut against the grain of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. Let usobserve a large caveat. The abstraction-reflexivity sequence is not to be identifiedwith a single dimension of intellectual “progress,” taking the form of theemergence of empirical-discovery science. My analysis is neutral regarding thevalue of the upper levels of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. It is merely apredominant feature of the natural history of intellectual communities.A second general point may be made about long-run intellectual tendencies.The abstraction/reflexivity sequence can grow from any materials on whichintellectuals focus attention. Philosophy has diverse starting points: issues ofritual propriety in ancient China, cosmological myths in India and Greece,theological disputes in early Islam. Philosophical abstraction shifts attentionfrom the original questions and transforms them into other matters. Higher or“pure” philosophy emerges as a focus on abstraction and reflexivity in theirown right. Techniques arising as tools ancillary to disputes become ends inthemselves. Sub-topics become specialized branches of attention. Epistemology,788 • Meta-reflectionsarising in disputes over substantive questions, turns away from answering thosequestions and into its own arena of dispute, raising the complaint made by acritic of neo-Kantianism about the “endless sharpening of the knife which isnever used to cut anything.” This is the distinctiveness of the philosophicalfield: as the purest form of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence, philosophy isconstantly re-digging its foundations, moving not forwards but backwards,deepening its questions by digging the ground out from under them.Not every form of intellectual life does this. The philosophical mode isbased in the oldest and most central intellectual community, but many specialtieshave branched off from it, some of which remained more resolutely focusedon their substantive questions. Instead of constantly re-digging their foundations,fields of empirical-discovery science and other arenas of scholarship—such as the study of history—have accumulated facts and principles by doggedlysticking to a fixed level of abstraction. Analytically, the several modes ofintellectual life may overlap; and there are special conditions, to be consideredin their due place, when a field can evade the abstraction-reflexivity sequence,as well as when it is subject to it.The second major theme of philosophical networks, then, is goal displacement.Here is one of the sources of conflict in intellectual life. There isdisgruntlement, frustration about being unable to solve questions, or ratherabout seeing their meaning fade away before one’s eyes. It is part of a perennialconflict among traditionalists and progressives, conservatives and radicals—not necessarily in the lay senses of these terms as they might be applied toreligion or politics, but among intellectuals taking their stand on a higher orlower level of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. Sniping takes place acrossthe levels: the disparagement of higher levels as “logic-chopping” or uselesssubtleties, “angels dancing on the head of a pin”; and name-calling in theopposite direction, a lineage in which postmodernist charges of “foundationalism”take their place. Each side accuses the other of hindering insight; theprocess of intellectual history is merciless toward both. Their conflict is onemore manifestation of the very general process of conflict which drives intellectualchange. Neither conservatism nor radicalism at any one level is a guideto what will emerge as their positions are transformed at later levels of theabstraction-reflexivity sequence. Goal displacement means that, from the pointof view of the participants, subsequent intellectual history is always a matterof rude surprises.What causes the abstraction-reflexivity sequence? Durkheim theorized thata trend toward abstractness and universalism takes place in the collectiveconsciousness as the social division of labor increases. As evidence he citestrends in religion and law. In isolated tribal societies, religious symbols areconcrete and specific; rules are reified and their violations expiated by punitiveSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 789ritual. As societies grow larger, more stratified, organizationally and economicallydifferentiated, the spiritual entities of religion become less localized,expanding in their scope, and eventually leaving the concrete worldly levelentirely for a transcendent realm. Still further on this continuum, the “modernism”of Durkheim’s day regarded God as a symbol of the universal moralorder, and explained the anthropomorphic traits of earlier belief as reification,mistaking a symbol for a concrete entity. The Durkheimian explanation cannotbe straightforwardly adopted because of two difficulties. The mechanical solidarityof small enclosed groups does not disappear in differentiated modernsocieties; concrete symbols subsist along with various levels of abstractioncharacterizing the many realms of public and professional life. And the networksof intellectuals are not identical with the society at large; the insulationof an intellectual community from lay conceptions is the key to the existenceof distinctively intellectual topics. With proper amendment, the Durkheimianexplanation can be applied to conceptual trends within the intellectual communityitself.An intellectual network is a community of implicit awareness among itsmembers: opposing stances within the attention space structure one anotherthrough their arguments; intergenerational transmission of concepts and topicsmakes up the basic sense of what the community is about. As Durkheim held,abstraction develops so as to maintain unification across diverseness. As moremembers are included in the intellectual network, its collective consciousnessis strained to encompass their distinctiveness. G. H. Mead’s generalized other,which plays the part of the audience for the internalized conversation ofindividual thinkers, increases in scope. Ideas are emblems of group membership;to keep up the sense of membership across the generations, under conditionsof repetitive creativity, the collective consciousness becomes more abstract.The nomos-physis debate at the time of the Sophists was transcendedby moving to the stance of a higher abstraction, from which particular conceptsof morality (and of cosmology as well) could be seen as sub-realms within amore encompassing realm of Form. Debates at one level of abstraction areresolved by moving to a higher level of abstraction from which they can bejudged and reinterpreted. This never brings the process of debate itself to anend; the intellectual world lives on debates, and each new conceptual levelprovides terrain on which new oppositions can be staked out.The Durkheimian model helps explains the increase in abstraction. Reflexivitycan be explained as a further consequence of expanding the scope ofthe generalized other. The mind of a “sophisticated” intellectual, heir to ahistorically complex network of oppositions and changes in level, internalizesan invisible community of diverse viewpoints, unified by looking on them froma yet more encompassing standpoint. Reflexiveness grows more intense as there790 • Meta-reflectionsis more history of the network to incorporate. Awareness grows that the individualpositions are constructed as parts of a web of oppositions. Eventuallythe meta-concept emerges that there are higher-order concepts, and that thereis an error—a narrower sphere of awareness—in treating a symbol as if it werea concrete existent. Reflexivity is the growing self-exploration of relationsamong standpoints within this increasingly complicated network-generatedmind.The argument so far explains why the diversity of positions within anintellectual community should drive upwards the abstraction-reflexivity sequence,but it leaves open a prior question: What causes the diversity ofpositions in the first place? Here I bring in two of the basic principles ofintellectual creativity, used throughout this book: the law of small numbers,which shapes the internal struggles within the intellectual attention space; andthe two-step model of causality, through which external social conditionsoperate indirectly by rearranging the material base for intellectual life.Creation by Negation and by External ShockIntellectual life proceeds by horizontal tensions among contemporaries as wellas by vertical sequence among the generations. Let us avoid the retrospectivefallacy, the explanatory complacency which comes from taking for grantedwhat the positions will be because we already know the history, say, of Greekphilosophy from Thales to Epicurus. Visualize a small number of particles—three to six—moving through a tunnel of time; each draws energy from itspast momentum, renewed and accelerated by repulsion from the other particles.This tunnel is the attention space of the intellectual world; indeed thetunnel is created by the movement of the particles and the tensions that connectthem. The tunnel’s walls are not fixed; it extends forward in time only so longas the negative interplay of the particles keeps up a sufficient level of energy.As arguments intensify, the tunnel becomes brighter, more luminous in socialspace; and as positions rigidify, going their own way without reference to oneanother, the attention space fades.Surrounding the tunnel are the ordinary concerns of the lay society. Personson the outside notice the intellectual tunnel only as much as the glow of itsdebates makes it visible from a distance. Intellectual stratification is representedby distance from the core of the tunnel. The walls of the tunnel are no morethan a moving glow generated from within. The trajectories of the particlesand the borders between light and shadow are seen most sharply at the center,by viewers situated on the main energy lines. The farther one is from the centralzone, the harder it is to see where the walls are, this membrane of relevancefor the controversialists inside it. In the half-light of semi-focused regions, it isSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 791easy to mistake residues of old arguments for the central issues that willgenerate the forward thrust of the attention space. Provincials, latecomers, andautodidacts flail in the wake of past disputes but do not catch up with thebright center of energy.The forward movement in time, if continued at a high level of creativeenergy, traverses the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. At each point in creativetime, the current level of abstraction is divided by the three to six factionsallowed by the law of small numbers. Negation at the forefront occurs alongthe dimensions stressed most strongly in the arguments of the leading school—the most brightly glowing particle—as opposing particles formulate negationsto it which preserve or raise the level of abstraction. Thus occurs the multiplicationof positions, providing the tensions on which moves can be made tohigher levels of abstraction.Consider now the external conditions driving creativity. The abstractionreflexivitysequence does not run off automatically; there are periods whenintellectual life stagnates at a fixed level of abstraction, or even retrogresses toa lower level. The famous periods of creativity are those when the abstractionreflexivitysequence is moving forward most rapidly. These flareups in the timetunnel are set off against the periods of mild, steady light when nothing muchseems to be happening, and against the twilights when sophistication is lost.The two-step model of causality applies: when external conditions disrupt theintellectual attention space, internal realignment takes place; and this in turnunleashes the creativity for formulating new positions, new tensions amongthe privileged arguers at the core of the attention space. When the materialbase for one cluster of intellectual factions is destroyed, their space in the fieldis opened up to be occupied by a new set of positions. When a large particledisappears from the field of oppositions, new particles veer and fragment totake its place, lighting up the tunnel in an episode of famous creativity. In India,when the religious base for Buddhism was destroyed, the victorious Hindusled by Shankara subdivided to take over the range of philosophical positionsonce held by their rivals. Conversely, the side experiencing the collapse of itsexternal base huddles together into a defense alliance, sometimes imploding ina brilliant moment, as in the grand coalition of pagan philosophies led byPlotinus against the rise of Christianity. When a new material base for intellectualssprings up, new factions appear simultaneously in a rush to fill thisnew arena of attention with the three to six opposing positions available underthe law of small numbers. We have sees this repeatedly: following the inventionof higher education in the generation of Plato and his rivals; with the reformof the Chinese examination system in the Sung dynasty, undergirding theoutburst of Neo-Confucianism; in the rise of the medieval Christian university;yet again with the German university revolution, which set off a new terrainfor research specializations.792 • Meta-reflectionsOnce the shock in the external base subsides and the internal rearrangementof factions in the attention space runs its course (a process which takes severalgenerations), intellectual life settles into a routine. Continuous movement inthe abstraction-reflexivity sequence depends on repeated shocks to the externalbase. The dynamism of intellectual life which characterizes Europe rathercontinuously in the 30 generations from 1000 c.e. onward, is due indirectlyto the amount of institutional change in the surrounding society, resulting ina large number of shifts in the bases which have supported intellectuals.Textual Scholasticism and Arrested SequencesIn periods when there are no shocks rearranging the material base, the internaldivision of the attention space remains static. What then are the intellectualsdoing to fill up their time and the attention of their colleagues and pupils? Theproblem strikes us most forcefully in the case of “scholastic” periods, whenintellectuals are primarily curators of old texts. Nevertheless, even a backwards-looking textual mode is not necessarily stagnant. We find here anotheranalytically separable strand: a textual scholastic sequence which may unfoldeither in isolation—totally dominating the intellectual space—or in combinationwith the abstraction-reflexivity sequence.There is a temptation to identify this textual-scholastic mode with Asianmodes of thought; we see it prominently in Confucianism, in both Indian andChinese Buddhism, and within the Hindu darshanas. Yet it is not a matter ofregional mentality; there is similar textual-scholasticism in Hellenistic andRoman antiquity, among the Arabic Aristoteleans, and in medieval Christendom.A textual-scholastic mode becomes prominent again in the universityscholarship of the 1800s and 1900s, within both philosophy and other disciplines.The study and commentary on classic texts of “dead Germans” is alarge part of contemporary sociological theory; and in the contemporaryacademic world more generally there is polemic over the attention paid to thecanon of “white European males”—a polemic whose principal results are toenlarge the canon, not to move away from the textual commentary mode.It is not the activity of preserving texts and writing commentaries per sethat makes a philosopher unoriginal. The textual commentary is employablein the mode of scholastic conservatism but adaptable as a means of publishingnew ideas. The copyist takes the opportunity to add clarifying commentaries,which become all the more acceptable as the growing antiquity of a text bringsa demand for explaining archaic language or cryptic modes of expressiongrown incomprehensible with time. We are inclined to regard a string ofsuper-commentaries as the essence of scholasticism, but they can also be casesof cumulative development to progressive levels of sophistication. The advantagefrom the point of view of the writer is that if one attaches one’s commen-Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 793tary to a famous text, one’s own work can be assured of wide circulation. Thegreat works of Chinese philosophy are to a large extent commentaries onearlier classics, from the Yi Ching appendices and the Great Learning attachedto the Book of Rites, through the “Dark Learning” attached to the Tao TeChing and the Confucian classics. The works of the Neo-Confucian school arelargely in the form of compilations and commentaries on classic texts.We see much the same thing in India. The great work of the Nyaya schoolis Vatsyayana’s commentary on the Nyaya-sutras, and an analogous positionfor the Vaisheshika is held by Prashastapada’s commentary on the Vaisheshikasutra.Among the Buddhists, the growth of the scholasticizing Abhidharmaliterature occurs simultaneously with the development of new philosophicalpositions: it is a vehicle for creativity from the early Sarvastivada realiststhrough the Yogacara Idealists; schools which transcended the Abhidharmacompilations replaced them with accretions of commentaries on other texts,such as the logic treatises which were vehicles for the metaphysical systems ofDignaga and Dharmakirti.1 Composition of commentaries should be regardedas a mode of publication, in the absence of an open market for books, andwhere religious education provided the main place where texts could be physicallyreproduced. What was propagated in this way was determined not by themode of publication, but by the general conditions of opposition and synthesiswithin the intellectual networks.The Christian “scholastics” of the medieval universities, whose name wasgiven to this style, used the commentary mode of publication, but they werenot predominantly traditionalistic in the content of their work. The universityscholars from Abelard to Scotus constituted one of the most intensely creativeperiods in the history of world philosophy, exemplary of the abstractionsequence at its most dynamic. The pejorative connotation of “scholastic” wasapplied to them by their enemies and successors, the Renaissance Humanists.Ironically, the latter were more “scholastic” in the narrow sense of the term,adulators of past classics, attempting to recover original meanings rather thaninnovating on abstract philosophical terrain.In the Confucian, Buddhist, and Hindu networks, textual scholasticism wassupported by an ideology that venerated ancient texts and denigrated departuresfrom them. The effect was not necessarily to stifle innovation; newhigh-status texts, in order to be regarded as religiously inspired, were producedanonymously or pseudonymously and attributed to as great antiquity as possible.The Tao Te Ching, probably written around 240 b.c.e., was projectedbackwards to a mythical sage antedating Confucius, no doubt to claim rankover contemporary Confucian rivals. Successive Mahayana sutras, like theirJaina sutra contemporaries, were attributed to earlier incarnations of theirrespective religious lineage heads; competition over “more ancient than thou”794 • Meta-reflectionsexpanded the calendrical framework, escalating the eons of cosmic time withinwhich their founders are situated. It is almost a rule of thumb that the moreancient a text claims to be, the more recently it falls in the sequence ofcomposition. This “archaizing strategy” is itself a form of innovation; ratherthan claiming creativity moving forward in time, one projects the edge ofcreativity backwards.There was plenty of room for creativity within the textual commentarymode. Rival camps could choose their favorite text on which to expound. Wesee this in full force in the high period of Tokugawa Japan, when rival schoolsattached their views to old texts which served as vehicles, while denouncingthe views of their rivals as later accretions. The Ancient Learning school ofYamaga Soko, Ito Jinsai, and Ogyu Sorai dismissed the previously dominantNeo-Confucian school as merely the learning of the Sung dynasty, while usingits newfound independence for drastic conceptual innovations. The still morearchaizing National Learning school of Kamo Mabuchi and Motoori Norinaga,turning to the Japanese poetic-religious classics, exemplifies another pathalong which textual commentary acquires its own mode of innovation. Thereis a cumulative development of the techniques of scholarship, the sharpeningof the critical tools, and the accumulation of knowledge about historicalsequences. The claims of Neo-Confucians to propound eternal verities werepunctured by rival scholars who could marshal a better historical apparatus.The claim to uncover a “true” tradition is an innovative move against prevailingconventions. The battle among Japanese scholars over the distant pastmoved to a higher level of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence, creating asophisticated neoconservative epistemology about the limits of rationality inorder to argue about the nature of historicity and the accessibility of tradition.Again the dynamic is not confined to Asian textual scholars; a similar sequenceis traced out in biblical scholarship in the German universities after 1820, fromthe figurative interpretations by liberal “higher criticism” to Barthian neo-orthodoxy.The textual commentary mode contains several possibilities for innovation,including the use of commentaries as publication vehicles for new ideas, thedevelopment of historical scholarship and reflexivity about one’s historicalsituatedness, and eventually about the abstract conception of historicity itself.The emergence of self-conscious historical standards marks a level of sophisticationabove the blind adulation of texts for their claimed antiquity. Butsharpening technical standards of historical scholarship does not necessarilybring an upward move in the overall sequence of philosophical abstraction andreflexivity. The “Old Text school” arose in the Han dynasty as a movement oflibrarians and textual scholars attacking the pseudo-ancient texts of the HanConfucians, and branding them as a phony “New Text school.” ModernSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 795scholars tend to regard the members of the “Old Text school” as progressives,rationalists who punctured the occultist cosmologies promulgated by their“New Text” rivals. Nevertheless, this kind of “rationalism” may be sterile forphilosophical innovation. To insist on the letter of old texts is less innovativethan to produce new metaphysical constructions, even if the latter is done isthe false guise of promulgating fake ancient texts. A comparative proof is thatIndia never had anything like an “Old Text school” of scholars puncturing thearchaizing claims of the predominant publication practice. Indian Buddhist andHindu philosophies alike were dominated by their own version of the “NewText school,” and it was via this vehicle that both proceeded much further inthe abstraction-reflexivity sequence than did Chinese philosophy.The textual-scholastic mode is a vehicle within which the creativity of networkcompetition may take place, to the extent that the usual dynamics of internalopposition and external shock are present. There is another version,which we might call “classificatory scholasticism,” which is a genuine arrestingof movement at a constant level of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. In thiscase there is no creativity, at least not of the sort which makes famous namesin the long-term histories; here we find lineages filled with names rememberedas minor at best. Nevertheless, there is a dynamism of classificatory scholasticismas well, making it an activity that takes up its own modicum of creativeenergy and focuses attention on the inner rankings of the intellectual networkduring these periods.Consider the later Neoplatonists of the Roman period. They rely on authorities,above all Plato, Aristotle, the Chaldean Oracles, the Orphic hymns;their constant reference is “as the gods say,” “the theurgists say,” and the like(CHLG, 1967: 280–282).2 Their method is the textual commentary, unimaginative,hair-splitting, full of repetition and jargon. But they are not stagnantin the sense of lacking movement from one scholar to the next. Over time therebuilds up a tendency to argue for conclusions in an explicit chain of deductiveargument, demonstrated in formal Euclidean proofs. The Neoplatonist cosmology,a hierarchy of emanations from the highest unity down through theplurality of the lower spheres, is constantly expanding. Later members of theschool multiply levels, introducing further hypostases into the three expoundedby Plotinus, subdividing into further triads, inserting demons and heroesamong gods and disembodied souls. These cosmologies become increasinglyconcrete and particularistic, regressing in the abstraction-reflexivity sequence;this regression is combined with innovativeness in the sheer quantitative expansionof complexity within these systems.The dynamics of this intellectual game are to classify and to list. The Vedictraditions are full of numbered lists. Buddhist texts of the early period list thefour kinds of insight, the four kinds of Right Effort, five Moral Powers, seven796 • Meta-reflectionsQualities of Wisdom, the eightfold Noble Path, and so on. It is tempting tointerpret these rubrics as simply mnemonic devices from the period of oralrecitation; but the list motif continues into the period of written texts as well.Moreover the lists keep expanding in both periods, making the mnemonic taskeven more difficult. The classificatory mode is pervasive in Indian scholarship,through the Hindu darshanas as well as the period of the Buddhistmetaphysical systems. The major Hindu cosmological systems, Samkhya andVaisheshika, derive from names for “classification” or “making distinctions.”The number of the various kinds of things becomes the topic of dispute, theframe in which philosophical issues are raised. The Hindu schools are concernedwith how many kinds of knowledge there are, and in the Nyaya school,which specializes in rules of debate, how many kinds of fallacies and how manyparts of the syllogism.This is the pathway toward the sub-discipline of logic. This “scholastic”impulse within Greek philosophy, as early as Aristotle’s school, leads to aclassification of types of predicate and of the figures and moods of the syllogism,just as it is scholasticism within Greek mathematics that leads to theaxiomatic classification system culminating in Euclid’s geometry. This classificationgame is a goal displacement in the abstraction-reflexivity sequence,turning away from the substance of arguments to the formal rules of theargumentation process; nevertheless, it opens an arena in which creativity cantake place, if in a technical guise difficult for outsiders to penetrate. We areinclined to view the classificatory activities of the Hellenistic and the laterIslamic logicians as mere droning scholasticism; and indeed this was the viewof many philosophers nearer to them in time. Creative activity sometimes wenton within the technical schools of logic in these times, but such work does nottravel well, nor does it propagate its intellectual energy widely. Avoiding valuejudgments, we may say merely that the classificatory mode is generally lookeddown on by intellectuals who work on more widely appealing ethical andmetaphysical issues. The long-term attention that constitutes the historicalself-image of the community drops the technical classifiers into the backgroundin favor of more spectacular moves in the abstraction sequence, labeling asstagnant the periods in which the technicians dominate.The classificatory mode can also take the form of hierarchic classifications.This was especially prominent in medieval Chinese Buddhism. The most successfulschools, T’ien-t’ai and Hua-yen, engaged in the practice called p’anchiao,arranging the various Buddhist doctrines in ordered lists from the mostnaive up through the most sophisticated. Classification served several purposes.It introduced bibliographic order, important for Chinese Buddhism as a foreign-based religion subservient to the importation and translation of texts froma morass of sects formulated in India. Classification also constituted a turf inSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 797its own right on which the intellectual division of the attention space could goon, not with spectacular changes in the level of abstraction, but by trying outvarious modes of classification of texts (by content, chronologically, by modeof exposition), giving rise to many minor puzzles to establish consistencyamong the various modes. Classification served the purposes of religiouspolitics, simultaneously maintaining the alliance among various proponents ofthe doctrine while asserting superiority for one’s own sect. Later, as scholarlyBuddhism weakened under political pressure, the classification mode allowedfor syncretistic alliances. The last great Hua-yen syncretizer, Tsung-mi, wentso far as to include Confucianism as the first step in the Buddhist hierarchicalsequence, and to work out elaborate correspondences among the numberedBuddhist precepts and the various rubrics of Chinese cosmology: the FiveAgents, five emperors, five sacred peaks, five colors, five virtues, and so forth(Gregory, 1991: 282). Tsung-mi appealed simultaneously to the last survivingstrong Buddhist sect by extending classification to Ch’an (Zen) doctrines (eventhough Ch’an itself, at this time in its expansive phase, was militantly antischolastic),while extending a bridge to enemy Confucian and Taoist tenets.The classificatory mode with numbered lists sometimes overlaps with numerology.Here numbers are regarded as a system of occult correspondences,linking the world into a net of symbols. Such a system can be used fordivination or magical manipulation. The Cabalism of the Hellenistic periodparallels in this respect the correlative cosmology formulated in the Handynasty, which remained such a significant part of the Chinese repertoire downthrough the Neo-Confucians (and which we see the syncretizer Tsung-miintroducing into Buddhism via the p’an-chiao textual classifications). Here itis important to bear several distinctions in mind.Numerology is not per se a form of the development of mathematics; thatis to say, mathematics has its own sequence of abstraction and reflexivity, inrelation to which the practice of numerology is a diversion into a side-channelat a lower, more concrete level.3 Nor should we regard numerology as acontinuation of primordial or popular magic. Numerology appears not at thebeginning of the intellectual sequences in China, India, and Greece, but aftera phase of abstract development. Numerology is an offshoot of the scholasticpath of development, the textual-scholastic sequence. It is scholasticism itself,combined with the concreteness that comes from appealing to lay audiencesrather than specialized intellectuals, which produces the upsurge of sophisticatedoccultism.Numerology and the divination games of correlative cosmologies are a kindof busywork of intellectuals, a way of playing the game in the attention spaceat times when the external conditions driving creativity on the “mainline” ofthe abstraction-reflexivity sequence are in abeyance. It is a version of the798 • Meta-reflections“normal science” of philosophy, played at a level of reified abstractions,providing a fund of small-scale puzzles rather than the deep troubles aroundwhich philosophy makes its more spectacular moves.The same may be said in a more general sense about textual scholasticism.The causes of scholasticism are to be found in the normal conditions of anycommunity of teachers, curators of past knowledge to be passed along tosubsequent generations. Scholasticism is the baseline of intellectual life; it isone analytically distinct process along with whatever other sequences, abstraction-generating or otherwise, happen to take place. In the absence of externalshocks to the material base and of internal rearrangements under the law ofsmall numbers, scholarship settles down to a routinized activity. The quantitativeextension of classifications and commentaries is the bureaucratization ofintellectual life.Reversals and Loss of AbstractionWhat then of periods in which there is an actual slippage, a retrogression inthe abstraction-reflexivity sequence? We find several instances of this pattern.In China, the abstraction reached by the Mohists and the School of Names isreversed into the concrete reifications of Han Confucianism; the revival ofabstract philosophy in the “Dark Learning” period lasts only a few generationsbefore Confucianism (and all the more so Taoist religion) returns to a concretelevel for many centuries, until the abstract sequence is resumed again with theSung Neo-Confucians. In late Greco-Roman Neoplatonism, there is a tendencyto lose abstraction as concrete deities are inserted into the austere metaphysicsof Plotinus’ emanations. In late Indian Buddhism, tantrism marks a collapsein abstraction, a movement toward magical forces and their concrete manifestations.Again in later Hindu philosophy, the acuteness of earlier argumentcollapses after 1600 in the combination of bhakti theist devotionalism withthe Advaita “leap-philosophy” beyond conceptual distinctions. Advaita becomesa united front against the political dominance of Muslim invaders, andlater the emblem of Indian nationalism in the face of European colonialists. Ineach case the material base for intellectual production gets squeezed; it is thedefensive move in time of weakness that produces the loss of abstraction andreflexivity.We need to treat this process with some care. Not every weakening of theexternal base of an intellectual position results in retrogression of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence; after all, there are also the great synthetic positionsin times of weakness, which push up the level of abstraction in the grandcombination. Plotinus is the best example. We should avoid confusing the kindof synthesis which occurs in response to overcrowding in the attention space—Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 799the grand syntheses of Aristotle, Aquinas, Dharmakirti—with the syncretismwhich occurs when there is external pressure to put together disparate positionsbecause of a radical collapse of their external base. The defensive syncretismin which intellectuals ally themselves predominantly with lay audiences has astrongly retrogressive effect on abstraction. Buddhism tantrism in India, Taoistpopular religion, Confucianism as a state cult: all of these make an alliancewhich eliminates the internal attention space of intellectuals and thereby undercutstheir professional drive toward acuteness of abstraction. It is not thecontents of the doctrine per se that is the key to the loss of this acuteness. Theshift to a cosmology of energy forces in tantrism is part of a de-differentiating,lay-oriented movement in the death period of Indian Buddhism, but the samedoctrines in the hands of the growing movement of Hindu thinkers (above allthe Kashmir Shaivites) become platforms for raising the level of metaphysicalabstraction and logical refinement.In general, the externally driven pressures for alliance tend toward syncretismrather than synthesis. The “four Vedas” became a standard package inthe period when the ancient sacrificial cult was in decay, an arbitrary compilation.Indeed, they survived textually for intellectuals above all because theyserved as a publication vehicle for the commentaries attached to them. Theoriginal alliance had no overall consistency, all the more so when Upanishadicinterpretations were attached. It was a “lumpy alliance,” sheer masses ofundigested material, held together by the external politics of the situation. Such“lumpy alliances” are the result of conditions which reduce the internal autonomyof the intellectual attention space. External conditions promoting suchloss of autonomy determine most of the historical episodes of retrogression inthe abstraction-reflexivity sequence.Three Pathways: Cosmological,Epistemological-Metaphysical, MathematicalWe come now to the ways the abstraction-reflexivity sequence has worked outin historical cases. Three sub-sequences are visible. First, there is a shift frommythological to philosophical cosmologies; an example is the takeoff intoabstract argument in India and Greece. Second, there is an interplay betweenepistemological and metaphysical arguments pushing toward higher levels ofabstraction and reflexivity. This sequence followed and built on the mythological-cosmological sequence in India and Greece; Islamic, Christian, and Europeanphilosophies generally built further upon this sequence. In ancient China,the argumentative sequence began with very different materials than in Indiaand Greece, then proceeded intermittently along much the same path; here themythological-cosmological sequence was not initial, but cut into the Chineseepistemological sequence later on, around the seventh or eighth generation,800 • Meta-reflectionsand thereafter tended to swamp it. Finally, there is a version of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence which takes place on the specialized terrain of mathematics,playing back into philosophy and driving its abstraction and reflexivityto new grounds. This sequence is found mainly in Europe, beginning in the1600s and playing a dominant role in the generations around 1900. Our“modern” or “Western” philosophy has gone especially far in the abstractionreflexivitysequence because it has built on all three sequences.Why did the various world regions start their sequences with argumentaround their distinctive questions? Initial contents of discussion were given byexternal conditions. Chinese philosophy arose in the context of political discussionsover the legitimating rituals of the state cult. In Greece the backgroundwas the decentralization of cults and temples, which reduced the significanceof religious legitimation, together with the secularization of political and legalargument in the emerging city-states. In India it was the decline of the Vedicpriestly powers and the competition of rival religious movements. In Islam itwas a tribal coalition administering its conquests and legitimating successiondisputes by forming schools of religious law. Once the argumentativecommunity is constituted, causal dynamics within each sequence work muchthe same way: oppositions splitting the network within each generation, togetherwith the periodic overcoming of those oppositions on a new level of abstraction.The Cosmological Sequencefrom religious mythology to world ingredient cosmologiesThe cosmological sequence proceeds along a series of steps. First there aremythologies, tales recounted by popular storytellers and reworked by semiprofessionalreciters and poets.4 Next the components of the world are classifiedas provinces of specialized gods, and stories are told explaining theirorigins. There follows a period of rationalizing these fragmentary world explanationsby systematizing into genealogies or pantheons. This shades overinto more abstract concepts in answer to the explicit question, what is theworld composed of: at first mixed lists of gods, elements, physical and psychologicalprocesses, followed by discussions of which ingredient or ingredientsare dominant. Eventually discussion moves to the level of metaphysical andepistemological abstractions; questions are raised about conceptual paradoxesand logical consistency, which are resolved by making the step to an explicitlyabstract level of philosophy.In India, the mythological period begins in pre-Vedic times, followed by acertain amount of systematizing of the Vedic pantheon under the organizationof the Vedic priests. In the Upanishadic period argument centers on the elementsor ingredients which make up the world; the transcendent monism iden-Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 801tified with the self, picked out of these texts some 30 to 40 generations laterby highly abstract Advaita philosophers, is only one of many elements in amorass of competing and, for the most part, pluralistic worldviews. Thenon-Vedic sages in the same period make themselves the center of debate bytransmuting these world ingredient discussions onto the level of coherentsystems of abstract concepts. Rivals at the time of the Buddha propoundvarious cosmologies of four elements, or seven; still further unification occursby focusing on a thread that runs through all the world components, karmaor fate. Gautama Buddha captures the center of the attention space by systematizingthe various world ingredients into a chain, grouping together psychologicaland physical elements into the aggregations (skandas) which makeup the world of experience. There is now an antithesis between a world-transcending“ultimate ingredient” (nirvana) and the constituents of the worlditself, bridged by rising to the level of a master concept, causality, ordering therelations of constituent parts.The center of action in the intellectual community has now shifted to anabstract philosophical discourse, even if it remains surrounded for centurieslonger by mythology in the Buddhist sutras, the Hindu Puranas and epics.Metaphysical and eventually logical and epistemological issues arise, leadinginto the second of our sequences. Cosmological issues however can also continuefor a long time, and in some respects the world ingredient sequence isnever outdated. There is a borderline between world ingredient cosmology andmore analytical metaphysical questions; for a long period the chief Buddhistand Hindu schools—the various factions of Abhidharma scholasticism, ofSamkhya and Vaisheshika—proceed from systematizing lists of world ingredients.In another direction, the search for world ingredients takes the form wemay call empirical science (although not its rapid-discovery version); doctrinessuch as the chakra scheme of medical physiology and systems of astrologicaldivination mix explanations of the material world with occultism and magic.In Greece, mythologies are systematized into a pantheon by Homer andHesiod. The nature-function gods are already a cosmological classificationsystem, and Hesiod’s genealogies are a version of causal sequence among worldelements. The discussion that breaks out in the generation of Thales nowdirectly expounds the originating or primal elements by reinterpreting mythsor postulating basic substances. The lineup of competing ingredients, as inIndia, is conceptually motley: water, air, fire, number, the unbounded, togetherwith various notions of natural transformations in the vein that “all things arefull of gods.” Three generations after Thales there is a break to abstractmetaphysical conceptions with Heraclitus and Parmenides, leading into theepistemological sequence.The Greeks traverse the cosmological sequence rapidly, arriving at the802 • Meta-reflectionsmetaphysical level in many fewer generations than in the Indian network. Thecosmological part of the Greek sequence does not thereby come to an end, butcontinues alongside the metaphysical level. Part of the philosophical communityis no longer concerned with cosmology, such as the Sophists; but theircontemporaries, Anaxagoras and more influentially Empedocles, with his fourelementscheme, successfully keep up the focus of attention on the lineage ofcosmological issues. Plato’s generation attains more abstract conceptions, givinga standpoint from which to revise cosmological heritages. Aristotle coordinatesmetaphysical and cosmological levels; he is rivaled by the atomism ofDemocratus, which is institutionalized into a long-standing position by theEpicurean school. The Stoics too have a strong cosmological component. Asin India, the Greek cosmological sequence continues for a long time alongsideother philosophical discussions. In one branch it is concretized, both de-mythologizedand de-metaphysicized in empirical science, such as in the varioussystems of the medical schools; in another direction, abstract ontology fuseswith magical occultism in Middle Platonism, the occultist numerologies, andlate Neoplatonism. In both sequences, Indian and Greek alike, we find notmerely a linear trajectory of cosmological abstraction finally sublated intometaphysics, but branching sequences expanding into niches on the intermediatelevels of concreteness and abstraction.In China the earliest sequence of philosophical argument is not cosmologicalbut political. The first issue on which the attention space divides is thecharacter of human nature; the chief rival positions are Confucian familistichierarchicalobligation, Yang Chu’s selfishness, and Mohist universal altruism;a few generations later they are Mencius’ human-heartedness, Hsun Tzu’sinnate evil, and the political repressiveness advocated by the Legalists. TheChinese route into philosophical abstraction proceeds not by competitionamong cosmological alternatives, but by the growth of procedural logic andconceptual investigation; this is visible in the sixth and seventh generations ofthe argumentative community, with Hui Shih’s paradoxes and Kung-sun Lung’s“School of Names.”The Chinese cosmological sequence takes off when the materials of primitivereligion are drawn into this argumentative community. Around 270 b.c.e.in the generation of Kung-sun Lung, just when the core network is at thetransition point to the metaphysical level of debate, the Yin-Yang scheme andTsou Yen’s Five Processes cosmology enter the field and rapidly take the centerof attention. Both are divination schemes, presumably nurtured in provincialplaces and drawing on the mythological stratum of popular magical practice.Tsou Yen makes a great success by systematizing the Five Agents (water, fire,wood, metal, earth) in such a way that they line up with current philosophicaldebates, as well as appealing to lay interests in political prediction and dynasticSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 803legitimation. In the next generation, the long-standing network of elite philosophersanswers with the Tao Te Ching, blending a Confucian concept ofbehavior and propriety, the way (Tao), with abstract issues of the significanceof nominalism, into a cosmology whose core ingredient is nameless naturalspontaneity.From now on the cosmological systems sweep to domination in Chinesephilosophy, derailing the secularized tone of moral and political discussion, aswell as turning back the short-lived trend into epistemology and metaphysics.In the next two generations (the eighth and ninth after Confucius), the mainintellectual events are the formulation of new cosmologically oriented textswithin the Confucian school: The Great Learning, which takes a naturalisticstance toward the “investigation of things”; The Doctrine of the Mean, whichinterprets the Confucian Superior Man as a mystical sympathy with the cosmicWay. At this time also is composed a Confucian appendix to the old Yi Chingdivination text, thereby bringing it into the Confucians’ professional canon.The takeover by the cosmological schemes is sealed in the twelfth generationby Tung Chung-shu, who systematizes Confucianism as a synthesis of Yin-Yang, Five Agents, and Yi Ching divination systems into a grand scheme ofcounterparts between cosmology and the political and moral order. TungChung-shu’s contemporary is the Hui-nan Tzu group of scholars, who producea rival cosmology of nature elements, divination practices, and political resonances,drawing together a mixture of non-Confucian cultural capital nowbecoming identified as Taoism.China ends up by the time of the Han dynasty in much the same place asGreece about the time of the late Presocratics or India at the time of theBuddha’s older contemporaries, although with a stronger political component.Confucian cosmology becomes relatively impervious to intellectual change nowthat its carriers are the curators of canonical texts and simultaneously ritualspecialists administering the cult which legitimates a strongly centralized state.From now on, even in downward times of the dynastic cycles when the empiredisintegrates, the Confucians are ideologists of centralization and imperiallegitimacy. Competition among intellectuals loses its autonomy from politicalfaction fighting and falls to a particularistic level: the various cosmologicalelements and colors, along with the phenomena of climate and natural disaster,are taken as correlated with the rise and fall of dynasties, and their discussionis equivalent to political prognostication favoring one state faction or another.5Confucianism becomes a religious pantheon, engaged in particularistic disputeswith the rival pantheons of Taoism and popular Buddhism; intellectual debatedrops to the level of arguing whether Lao Tzu, Confucius, or the Buddhataught the others first.When external conditions of intellectual production change, the cosmologi-804 • Meta-reflectionscal sequence is resumed in China. In the period 1030–1200, Neo-Confucianismis created out of a revival of Han dynasty cosmologies infused with Taoistdivination schemes. The discussion picks up again at a more abstract level,formulating the overarching cosmic-metaphysical concepts of the world substancech’i and the logos/principle li. After a detour, during which Confucianphilosophy is largely static and cut off from the much more abstract terrainof medieval Buddhism, Chinese metaphysics reemerges at approximately thepoint reached by the Greek Stoics.occultism and natural science: two side-channelsComparing China with the rest of the world shows that the several versionsof the abstraction-reflexivity sequence are indeed analytically distinct, and canbe combined in different orders in time. How far each world intellectualnetwork progresses in the sequence is variable. So are the starting times andthe length of the periods of arrested movement. In all three indigenous cases,India, Greece, and China, the cosmological sequence branches after it reachesthe level where metaphysical abstraction is first reached. One branch continuesfurther into ontological questions, blending with the metaphysical abstractionreached by the sequence of epistemological discussion; this happens mostnotably in India, as well as in Greece and its textual continuations in Islamand Christendom. A second branch turns aside to systematic speculation andempirical investigations of the natural world, which eventually become science.This branch was very active in China, as well as in Greece and its Western offshoots,formulating the specialized cosmologies of astronomy, medical physiology,chemistry, and so forth. A third branch, a blend between concreteempiricism and conceptual abstraction treated in a reified mode, leads intooccultism, a system of portents and correspondences combining the naturaland the symbolic, the human moral-political-psychological realm with a cosmologyof concrete nature.The cosmology sequence may run straight through to high levels of philosophicalabstraction. The other two branches pose the likelihood of arrestingor reversing the level of abstraction and reflexivity. The occultist path does soby holding to a lower-middle range of reified abstraction; occult forces, portents,and significances make sense precisely because they come from a levelof conceptual abstraction that could only have been reached by the accumulationof intellectual sophistication across the generations. At the same time,its adherents link it to practices which appeal to lay audiences and concerns,sometimes for political faction fighting or state legitimation, sometimes in theretail sale of popular magic. In either case, the autonomy of the internalintellectual discussion space is lost; the abstraction-reflexivity sequence is preventedfrom moving further.Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 805The sub-sequence which leads into empirical science would seem to be theopposite of the occultist branch; and indeed the proponents of these two pathshave often been explicit enemies. Wang Ch’ung and the “rationalists” of theOld Text school were energized and focused by their oppositional space carvedout against the Han Confucian occultists. But this path too can be retrogradeon the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. To be opposed to occultist reificationdoes not necessarily lead onward into further philosophical creativity, nor forthat matter into empirical-scientific discovery. To puncture stories of ghostsand portents with mundane “rational” explanation, as Wang Ch’ung did, isto be tied to the occultists through the very process of conflict, much in thesame way that twentieth-century opponents of parapsychology are locked intodebates that do not produce anything to move the forefront of discovery.Periods when a naturalistic, anti-occultist movement dominates tend to beperiods of opposition to metaphysics generally, as we see in both the EuropeanEnlightenment of the 1700s and its contemporary, the rationalism of the Jinsaiand Sorai schools in Tokugawa Japan.Science per se does not constitute the main path upward on the abstraction-reflexivity sequence; it emerges from a particular point on that sequence,but it is a separate branch.6 From this point of view, the vexed question of therelations between science and magical occultism may be briefly addressed.Science originates within the intellectual networks whose central concern hasbeen philosophy, and is subject to many of its dynamics.Empirical science throughout most of history has been a version of classificatoryscholasticism: not so much as applied to texts (although it may bethat too) but applied to natural observations, travelers’ tales, collections ofminerals and gems, and so on. Intellectual action and competition take theform of quantitative extension, much like what textual scholars do with theircategories, but consisting now in accumulating facts and imposing rubrics uponthem. As in the textual classificatory mode, the level of abstraction generallyremains constant. Naturalistic treatises ranging from Pliny to Albertus Magnushave this shape; classificatory scholasticism continues after the “scientific revolution”adds another mode of doing science, both in the “cabinet of wonders”popular among aristocratic science buffs in the 1600s and 1700s, and inLinnaean-style taxonomic enterprises.Naturalistic observations overlap with occultism, since the latter takes theform of correspondence schemes among the different realms of reality, includingthe natural world. Occultism too is a version of classificatory scholasticism,differing from the pure form, so to speak, by mixing concepts derived fromintellectual abstraction with the concrete interests of lay audiences in appliedmagic.The “scientific revolution” in Europe around 1600 changes not the natu-806 • Meta-reflectionsralistic focus of traditional science but its social dynamics. I have called thisdynamic rapid-discovery science (Chapter 10). By linking intellectual networksto genealogies of research equipment, a stream of new phenomena is producedon which theoretical interpretations may be constructed. Innovation and henceintellectual reputations no longer depend on moves in the abstraction-reflexivitysequence, as in philosophy, but on manipulating the forefront of researchtechnology, the offspring of Galileo’s telescope and Boyle’s air pump.7The question of occult influence in the scientific revolution arises becausethe takeoff of rapid-discovery science took place in the same networks whichincluded an upsurge of interest in occultism: Paracelsus, Bruno, Kepler, andNewton are famous examples of the overlap. Occultism did not cause rapiddiscoveryscience; the one is a mode of thought (and a long-standing traditionalone at that), the other a reorganization in social practice and material possessions.In mathematics, where the rapid-discovery mode took off a generationor so before it did in physical science, the new “machinery” for setting up andmanipulating equations was quite distinct from the methods of occultist numerology,which underwent no revolution.8There is, however, a similarity in the social milieux which constituted bothoccultism and rapid-discovery science. Both brought together lay interests withthe higher abstractions of the inwardly oriented arguments of the intellectualnetwork. Rapid-discovery science emerged when a branch of the philosophicalnetwork fused with commercial and other practitioners who had been developingthe genealogies of physical equipment such as lenses and pumps. Occultismis the use of higher abstraction schemes from the intellectual world asan invisible world of correspondences, by which practitioners appeal to layinterests in magical manipulation and prognostication. The late Renaissance–post-Reformation period, with its upheaval in the material bases of intellectualproduction and its cracking of religious-political legitimation schemes, promotedthe reshuffling of networks in both these respects. Occultism did notcause the rapid-discovery scientific revolution, but there is an underlying resemblancein the causes of both.The Epistemology-Metaphysics SequenceWe enter now the second of the major pathways of rising abstraction andreflexivity.assertive, descriptive, and critical epistemologiesThe world ingredient cosmologies, especially in their early periods, are asserted,not argued for. They are left to carry the day by their impressivenessas striking imagery, and later by the comprehensiveness and coherence of theSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 807world vision that they offer. They are pre-epistemological. In disputes betweenrival positions, commonsense standards are relied on, along with rhetoricaldevices such as argument by analogy. It is much the same when philosophicalargument begins on religious, ethical, or political issues rather than cosmologicalones. When the acuteness of argument intensifies as the intergenerationalchains of intellectual specialists lengthen, the subject of knowledge itself becomesa topic—a notch upward in the sequence of reflexivity. Here too theinitial statements are dogmatic assertions about the proper form of knowledge.The early Nyaya sutras simply list the kinds of knowledge: sense perception,inference, analogy, textual authority. On a similar level is the first classificationof types of knowledge by al-Baqillani (965 c.e.), about eight generations intothe Islamic sequence. The Neo-Confucians declare that knowledge comes fromthe investigation of things, but the reasons why this should be the preferredform of knowledge are not articulated. Whenever a new epistemological directionemerges, it tends at first to be baldly asserted: Roger Bacon—after a periodof acute discussion over knowledge of universals—propagandizes for experimentand experience by declaring that they bring complete certitude.Assertive epistemologies may be elaborated into descriptive epistemologies.The nature of knowledge is described in an ontological or psychological mode.In India the Jainas regarded ignorance as a substance, a kind of dust clingingto the soul and obscuring its original purity of knowledge. The early Samkhyaschool held knowledge to be based on a beam carrying a physical impressionfrom an object to the eye. Neoplatonists and Platonizing Aristoteleans, fromlate Greek antiquity through their medieval Islamic, Jewish, and Christiansuccessors, treated knowledge descriptively as a realm of ideas emanating fromGod or the highest principle; taking this for granted, they debated insteadwhether the human intellect was part of a single world-soul. Logic emergedeverywhere as a specialized kind of descriptive epistemology; on this turf aversion of the scholastic classification game was pursued much as on the terrainof world ingredient ontologies.None of these descriptive epistemologists raises critical questions aboutwhether these forms of knowledge are indeed really knowledge. Critical epistemologyarose in an antagonistic vein. In the Islamic world, it was forwardedby anti-rationalist Sufis or theological conservatives, such as al-Ghazali, whorejects the entire Greek corpus, along with the rational theology of Islamickalam, by exposing their lack of epistemological foundations; and Ibn Taymiyah,who critiques syllogistic reasoning as empty because of its glib assumptionof universal premises and self-evident propositions. The impulse to criticalepistemology is episodic, rising at certain periods (e.g., the times of Socrates,Descartes, Kant) and often falling back into a further round of descriptiveepistemology. Ibn Taymiyah’s criticisms did not stick; despite the victory of808 • Meta-reflectionstheological conservatism, logic, almost alone of the Greek heritage, survivedas a staple of the curriculum in the orthodox madrasas. Hume’s acute epistemologicalstandards were superseded in popular estimation for several generationsthereafter by Scottish common-sense philosophy, which hypothesized afaculty of common sense (a descriptive epistemology) as if it were a solutionto critical difficulties. Such retrogression in the level of epistemological analysisis common. It is obscured by the high prestige of epistemological questions inthe twentieth century, and the resulting tendency to read the history of ourclassics selectively as a movement from one peak of critical epistemology toanother.The epistemology-metaphysics sequence is itself a version of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. It is driven by the same general process of oppositionwithin the intellectual attention space and reorganization at a higher level ofabstraction. Critical epistemology is a higher order of reflexivity; it is secondorderepistemology, structured by conscious reflection on the first-order knowledgemethods of previous generations.Epistemology entwines with successive levels of metaphysical abstraction.Critical epistemology is a highway to higher metaphysical schemes. The Sophists’controversy, culminating in Socrates and Plato explicitly formulating thequestion of standards of objective knowledge, soon resulted in the creation ofnew ontologies: Plato’s universe of Forms, Aristotle’s more complex mixtureof Forms and the world ingredient cosmologies, along with several rivalmetaphysical systems. Similarly in India, the grander metaphysical abstractions,from the successive Buddhist systems through the Hindu Advaita and itsdualist rivals, were produced with the tools of immediately preceding epistemologicalacuteness. Even in China, where the epistemology sequence did notget very far, the epistemological querying of the School of Names was soonfollowed by the appropriation of namelessness as an ontological category inthe Tao Te Ching.At times the development of epistemology threatens to bring metaphysicsto a halt. Francis Bacon, setting knowledge on the path to empirical accumulation,aims to destroy philosophical abstraction. Bacon’s is an asserted epistemology,not a critical one. Descartes sets up explicitly critical standards witha similar aim of replacing old philosophy with new science. Nevertheless, theresult is not to end abstract philosophy but to underscore the separation ofscience and philosophy as distinct branches, and within philosophy to providetools by which metaphysics undergoes a spectacular revival. We see this repeatedly.Modern Europe, where critical epistemologies become increasinglycentral, goes through a consequent series of new and esoteric metaphysicalconstructions. Kant, who makes the notion of “critical” philosophy and theoryof knowledge central to the enterprise of philosophy, does not succeed in hisSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 809avowed intention to fence off the sphere of forbidden speculation, but providesa tool by which Idealist constructions might proceed onto that terrain. Frege,who aims to clear up confusions by introducing a new and very generallogical formalism, and Brentano, who proposes to induce logic from empiricalpsychology, are followed immediately by metaphysical constructions such asMeinong’s realm of “subsistence” containing Golden Mountains and roundcircles, and Husserl’s phenomenological hierarchy of essences and transcendentalego.Russell’s militancy in wielding the new logical tools illustrates a generalprocess of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. The brain-wracking paradoxeswhich he uncovers in the theory of sets are resolved by moving to the vantagepoint of a higher level of abstraction; the theory of types gives him a reflexiveposition from which to look down on the confusion among heterogeneoustypes of statements at the source of the contradictions. Nevertheless, Russell’snew tools quickly become the grounds for constructing bizarre new metaphysicalsystems, such as Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. It is not ironic for the antimetaphysicalmovement of logical positivism and analytical philosophy to befollowed by a renewed outburst of metaphysics;9 it is part of the normalepistemology-metaphysics sequence.If epistemologies provide food for metaphysics, the reverse is also the case.Aquinas derives his epistemology from metaphysical assumptions; since humanscannot apprehend the angelic world of universals, their knowledge mustproceed by way of particulars. Duns Scotus, attacking both the Augustinians’primacy of the knowledge of universals and Aquinas’s primacy of knowledgeof particulars, comes to the conclusion that the first knowledge is that ofunivocal being, beyond this division. Here epistemology fuses with ontology;critical questions of the bases of knowledge become inseparable from discussionsof what exists.In recycling back onto metaphysical terrain, epistemological critique tendsto subside, and epistemology is pursued again in a descriptive vein. Locke’sempiricism, with its attack on innate ideas and its studied distance from theuncritically asserted materialism of the corpuscular philosophy, comes out ofthe epistemological debates of the Cartesian network. Some followers treat thisas a descriptive epistemology and seek the principles of knowledge concretelyin empirical psychology. Locke’s immediate successor, Berkeley, however, convertsthe same empiricist tools into an extreme Idealist metaphysics. Humestarts out along the more conventional Lockean route by attempting to buildan empirical system of the human sciences, but is diverted into what for himare side-channels of epistemological conundrums. These in turn provide thepuzzle space for Kant. The richness of modern European philosophy is thisrecurrent recycling between epistemology and metaphysics.810 • Meta-reflectionsWe have now to consider the causes of the epistemology-metaphysicssequence. Three analytically distinct, sometimes historically overlapping causesare discernible: (1) skepticism as a catalyst (among the classic counter-movesit provokes is the cogito); (2) the sheer intensity and continuity of debate,resulting in epistemological reflexivity; and (3) the epistemological tensionsproduced by anthropomorphic monotheism.skepticism as catalystAn early and recurrent form of contested epistemology occurs in the form ofskepticism. One way in which this arises is that the intellectual attention spaceis overcrowded: multiple factions violate the upper limits of the law of smallnumbers, and there is a chaotic sense of lack of clear positions. Not only isthere no agreement on what is true, but even the alternatives are muddy.10Skepticism emerges in times of rapid expansion of the intellectual communityat venues for multi-sided debate. Athens at the time of the Sophists, whenall the networks converged and the level of competition over the originality ofideas was at its height, is one famous case. In the following generations, thisskepticism was raised to the level of a school with Pyrrho and Timon. Anothercase is India in the late Upanishadic period, with the inchoate breakdown ofVedic schools and the multiple sects of the shramanas. Some critical positionsdeny karma, others deny morality. The Buddha’s contemporary Sañjaya was afull-fledged skeptic, denying knowledge in general. Yet another parallel isChina during the late Warring States, when centers such as the Chi-hsiaAcademy promoted a network of “the hundred schools.” Specialists in debateappear who argue on both sides of a question; the style of paradoxical argumentbecame famous from Hui Shih down through the Tao Te Ching. In thecrucial founding periods for these three great regional traditions, the center ofattention was disturbed by expounders of paradoxes and claims that truth doesnot exist.11Militant skepticism proclaims the intellectual community as a whole a deadend. Nevertheless, skepticism arises only in an oppositional field of forces. Itis striking that opponents are never convinced by skeptical arguments, norderailed from continuing their positions. Skepticism is one faction among manywithin an array of oppositions; it is parasitical on its enemies, and dies outwith them. The skepticism of Arcesilaus’ Academy was tied to refutation ofthe Old Stoics, and disappeared with the changing doctrine of its opponents(Reale, 1985: 334).Skepticism is a step in the sequence of oppositions driving toward higherlevels of abstraction. The Greek Sophists were followed by the emergence ofexplicit epistemological standards with Socrates and Plato. The debating stancewas institutionalized in a dialectical logic by the Megarian school, followed bySequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 811the less contentious logic of the Aristoteleans and the Stoics. The epistemologicalconcerns of Greek philosophy were kept alive by the continual presenceand challenge of the Skeptics. In Greece, the strongest development of skepticaltraditions goes along with the strongest of the ancient developments of epistemologicalargument.In India, the omni-skeptical stance is put forward by Sañjaya. The responseof the intellectual network, crystallized by Gautama Buddha, is not so muchepistemology per se as a fusion of epistemology and ontology in the generalconception that the world of ordinary objects is an illusion. Buddhism incorporatesan extensive, but not unlimited, skepticism into its basic stance, directedagainst the material world and against any reification of absolutetranscendence, and especially against the permanence of the self; but the karmiccausal chain, and the religious pathway out of it, are not illusory. This doctrineof world illusion becomes the foil against which future generations of Indianphilosophers, on both the Buddhist and Hindu sides, would develop moreexplicit epistemologies.In China, the skepticism of the Warring States debaters is not very sharplyformulated; we have no records of an omni-skeptical doctrine that truth doesnot exist. Nevertheless, in the latter part of this period we find the strongestdevelopment toward Chinese epistemology. This sequence is the high point formany centuries of the Chinese push toward higher abstraction. In these generationsoccur the sole development of Chinese logic, the Mohist Canon, whichmay be interpreted as a move to overcome the paradoxes of Hui Shih and theSchool of Names by more careful abstract statement. This epistemologicalstandard is largely lost as the result of the dominant synthesis of Han Confucianism.A more enduring result is an epistemological-metaphysical fusion inthe Tao Te Ching ontology of the Nameless. Unlike in India, where worldillusion holds up an explicitly epistemological criterion, Taoist namelessnessproclaims not the non-truthfulness of ordinary objects, but only the futility ofarticulating them. Implicitly it is a statement of the end of epistemologicaldebate, and of the abstraction sequence in Chinese philosophy generally.The initial appearance of skepticism in all these world arenas occurs insituations where the intellectual attention space first undergoes a crisis ofovercrowding. Thereafter, as the networks accumulate concepts on a higherlevel of abstraction, skepticism is periodically revived, sometimes in its classicguise of “a plague on all houses,” but sometimes deliberately invoked as asurgical tool by those who wish to separate their own brand of truth from theaccretions of the field. In Hellenistic Greece and the “Second Sophistic” ofcompeting rhetors in the Roman Empire, skepticism is an institutionalizedschool, counterpart to the morass of the Middle Platonist syncretisms, whilethe seeming imperviousness of Stoicism and Epicureanism to resolving their812 • Meta-reflectionsdebates reinforces the mood that there can be no agreement on knowledge. Inthe later centuries of medieval Christendom, the endless and unconvincingdebates of Thomists and Scotists feed an increasingly critical mood among thenominalists. The mood intensifies by the late 1500s, with the piling of positionon position as Renaissance Humanists revive ancient philosophies; the resultis another period in which the law of small numbers does not structureattention and the energy of intellectual life flows in no clear channels. Externalpolitical conditions compound the situation; the splits and subsplits amongLutheran, Calvinist, and sectarian Protestantism, and the machinations ofsecular lords between these and Counterreformation Catholicism, add up to avast intellectual weariness of debate, which provides the setting in whichMontaigne, Sanchez, and Charron appear. In our own times, the massiveexpansion of the university professoriate resulting from the inflationary educationalmarketplace from the 1960s onward has brought about the reappearanceof skepticism in the relativistic anti-foundationalism of cultural historicistsand postmodernists.These are the skepticisms of overcrowding the attention space. Otherconditions give rise to less encompassing uses of skeptical tools. One is a fideistuse of skeptical arguments, not as omni-skepticism but to counterattack thecritics of religious tradition. Here we find Catholics using skeptical argumentsto undermine Protestant reformers’ reliance on the Bible; Christian conservativesundercutting scientific materialism or sensory empiricism; or again Jacobidefending scriptural faith against Kantian Idealism. Once the skeptical argumentis prominently advanced in the attention space, it can be used in latergenerations for various, more limited purposes, in combination with the maindoctrines of other factions in the field. The most striking of such uses ofskepticism is the cogito.recurrence of the cogitoThe “cogito ergo sum” is a dialectical move, building on omni-skepticism toestablish a criterion of knowledge and hence a critical epistemology; by applyingskepticism to itself, one establishes what cannot be doubted. The cogitois a classic example of an upward step in the reflexivity hierarchy. Some ofthe greatest figures in the histories of their respective traditions—Augustine,Shankara, Ibn Sina, Descartes, Fichte—made use of the cogito; that is to say,great reputations were made thereby as the result of opening up a new expanseof the abstraction-reflexivity sequence.12Augustine wrote in the late 300s c.e., in the generation of the Christian“Fathers of the Church,” when its doctrines were definitively codified. As aprofessional teacher of rhetoric, a convert from the last pagan profession,Augustine was in a position to ground Christian doctrine in the accumulatedSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 813sophistication of the philosophical networks. Skepticism, however, was a longstandingposition in Greek philosophy, going back some 20 generations. Sowhy should the cogito maneuver appear now for the first time? The defensethat skepticism undermines itself, that the doubter cannot doubt his owndoubt, had been urged by opponents since the early period of this school; andindeed it had been incorporated into the sophisticated skepticism of Aenesidemus(ca. 65 b.c.e.), the position that the skeptic withholds judgment on everything,even on skepticism itself. In this lineup of intellectual factions, thearguments and counter-arguments leave the field static; the skeptics find a wayto hold to their basic position, and anti-skeptics find reasons to their ownsatisfaction for rejecting skepticism and continuing with their systems.Augustine was motivated to do something else: he adopted skepticism toclear the ground of rival philosophies, then built upon it a secure system ofhis own—in this case to show that Christian doctrine is the superior ofpagan philosophies, by their own best criterion. Doubt extinguishes everythingbut one great truth, the existence of the doubter. The self which is therebyproven—the very awareness which receives this realization—is illuminated bythe clear light of consciousness, and this transcendent standard comes fromGod. Augustine became father to the many versions of Christian Neoplatonismwhich were to dominate down to the High Middle Ages and even beyond; healso established a tradition of critical epistemology with which the most intensestandards of argument had henceforth to contend.In the Islamic networks, skepticism appears relatively late; the politicalpower of religion allows no true omni-skepticism, and what does appear is thefideist skepticism put forward by al-Ghazali (ca. 1065 c.e.), rejecting Greekorientedfalsafa (the Arabic translation of “philosophy”) and the rationaltheology of Islamic kalam to bolster the rising third party, Sufism. Here theIslamic cogito appears several generations before skepticism rather than inresponse to it. The matrix is the formation, in the early 900s, of a full-fledgedarray of philosophical positions: rationalistic kalam is confronted with Greekfalsafa; Arab-Islamic nationalism is growing, and tolerance of non-Islamicreligions is disappearing in a wave of campaigns for religious conversion. Inthe AshÀarite school, which blends kalam with the more conservative theologicaltendencies, the codifier of doctrine al-Baqillani (late 900s) systematizes, ina scholastic manner, the various sources of knowledge. Among others he listsknowledge of self, which he notes cannot be doubted. This is not yet a criticalepistemology, and it is not based in confrontation with skepticism; knowledgefrom the senses and from reports of other persons is listed on the same levelwith al-Baqillani’s cogito.In the next generation concern for epistemology is invoked in a much moreconsequent way by Ibn Sina. He is fully aware of the external pressures build-814 • Meta-reflectionsing up against imported Greek philosophy. Ibn Sina’s fame-making project isto amalgamate this alien heritage with the key dispute within Islamic rationaltheology, the relation between God’s creative power and the fleeting substancesof the world. Ibn Sina’s cogito is a move to sharpen the sheer contingency ofcreated being, and thereby to produce a proof of God at hitherto unknownlevels of philosophical abstraction and reflexivity. Ibn Sina’s thought experimentof a man flying in the dark, doubtful of everything about the bodilyworld, is designed to show that being itself is always known, even if there isdoubt as to what kind of being it is. This sets the stage for Ibn Sina’sdistinctions among the sub-types of necessary, possible, and contingent being,leading to a proof of God as being purely necessary in itself alone.The case of Ibn Sina shows that the systematic use of doubt can be deliberatelyfostered in the clashes of intellectual life in order to uncover new levelsof abstraction. Until the revival of Aristotle in the mid-1200s, Augustine andIbn Sina (under the name Avicenna) were the two most influential imports inmedieval Christian philosophy. This is not surprising, given that they form thetwo high points of the dominant Neoplatonic tradition, honed to epistemologicalacuteness by hostile confrontation with militant monotheism. Ibn Sina’suse of doubt would be emulated even after the triumph of Christian Aristoteleanism;Duns Scotus drives beyond both Aquinas and Avicenna to yethigher levels of metaphysical abstraction by pointing to univocal being, thatwhich we conceive of even if we are in doubt as to whether it is existence oressence.Generally speaking, the rationalistic lines of Islamic and Christian philosophyhave no use for omni-skepticism; Duns Scotus’s use of doubt is quitelimited and specific. A full-blown skepticism, together with the cogito, doesappear with the outburst of the nominalist movement in the 1300s. Here thesituation is more like the classic conditions for skepticism as a plague on allhouses, which typically arises when the attention space is crowded, and thelines of rivalry have become set and show no sign of going away. Jean ofMirecourt, in the height of the action at Paris in the 1340s, takes to an extremethe nominalist tactic of undercutting Thomist and Scotist positions, and indeedany rational propositions of theology. Mirecourt hits on the cogito, but as aresidual, the one item of knowledge that is secure because it passes the test ofresisting self-contradiction. Mirecourt was an offbeat character in medievalChristian philosophy; his books were burned, and his doctrine was withoutinfluence. Here the cogito acquires no fame because it has no system-generatingconsequences. Mirecourt’s use is purely destructive.In India, Shankara established a dominant reputation for the entire periodof post-Buddhist philosophy by a constructive use of the cogito. His is afull-fledged use of omni-skepticism, to clear the decks of all worldly knowledge.Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 815Then: doubt proves the existence of the doubter and of a luminous ground ofconsciousness; this is the highest reality, beyond dualism and its opposite aswell. There had been no tradition of omni-skepticism in Indian philosophy fora very long time (since Sañjaya in the generation before the Buddha), andShankara was not reviving its memory. But this is not quite a case of Shankaracreating both the skepticism and the cogito which overcomes it at the sametime. He has two key ingredients in his network of antecedents: the debatesamong his immediate masters in the Mimamsa school of realists, who hadraised an acute question of epistemological standards and the necessary roleof consciousness in knowledge, and the entire Buddhist tradition, which hadheld the Idealist side of the field that Shankara now took over for Hinduphilosophy. Buddhist philosophy had incorporated an institutionalized skepticismabout the world of name-and-form, extending even to the emphasis thatnirvana should not be reified. Shankara could use the heritage of this skepticismto overthrow the worldly-sensory realism which was widespread among theother Hindu darshanas. At the same time, a cogito move was attractive to himbecause the non-existence of the self was one central item of Buddhist dogma.A proof of the self as the pathway to the highest reality enabled Shankara tokeep himself orthodoxly non-Buddhist while appropriating Buddhist turf andbuilding a Hindu Idealism.The cogito as a system-founding move allows various kinds of edifices tobe constructed upon it. Augustine, Ibn Sina, and Shankara used it to groundIdealism. Descartes used the cogito so that he could clear away scholasticphilosophy and the Humanists’ revival of the Greeks alike, trumpeting a freshstart for the new science with an ontology of extended substance. In this case,Descartes emerged from a network where skepticism already flourished; he isonly a few links away from Montaigne, who used skepticism to urge disengagementfrom the polemics of the religious wars. Descartes’s own teacher,Veron, was a Catholic fideist who used skeptical arguments against Protestantreliance on the Bible. For those of us educated in the tradition of modernEuropean philosophy, Descartes’s is the famous cogito, because the system-generatingtasks for which he used it, and the multifarious branches which followed,constitute the framework within which we think.The importance of the system-building trajectory is made plain in theaftermath. Descartes’s philosophy was construed both broadly and narrowly,the latter by specific Cartesian and anti-Cartesian movement. Descartes’s cogitowas the topic of dispute among these circles in the 1670s; opponents raisedissues such as whether the cogito itself means anything more than “I thought,therefore I think I was.” Despite this acuteness, Huet and Régis are minorfigures in their long-term influence; criticism in the absence of constructivealternatives does nothing to open up further developments of the attentionspace.816 • Meta-reflectionsYet among the most powerful tactics in setting off new intellectual movementsare broadenings of the cogito approach. Kant’s transcendental methodof searching for the necessary grounds implied in any judgment is a generalizationof Descartes’s self-limiting doubt. Fichte’s version drops out theCartesian step of proving the existence of the empirical self; the most undeniableproposition A  A implies a permanent self for which it is true. By aseries of similar steps, Fichte derives the existence of the external world andthe unfolding of a dialectic in which self-undermining statements lead onwardto the elaboration of the whole system. Two generations later, when Idealismappears in the American universities, Royce formulates a version of the cogitowhich combines the Cartesian and Fichtean moves: the existence of errorimplies the existence of a standard in terms of which it is error; to doubtsomething implies that there is something which is apprehended in some way,by a deeper self beyond our momentary consciousness. Kant and Royce didnot spring up in situations where skepticism was a significant living faction inthe intellectual world; both invoked skepticism because they had uses for it inconstructing their own systems.13 If skepticism did not exist, it would have hadto be invented. As it happens, they went looking for what sources of skepticismthey could find.The fame of the Cartesian cogito gave rise to a number of adaptations inFrance, where Descartes became nationalistically enshrined in the educationalcurriculum. Maine de Biran (ca. 1815) substitutes the formulation “I will,therefore I am.” This is not an argument from the self-limitation of skepticism,but a means of breaking free from the empirical associationist psychology untilthen dominant in France. Invoking Hume, Maine holds that external sensationsgive no necessary causal connections; it is the inner experience of will overcomingresistance that reveals the immediate certainty of causality. A moreexplicit analogy to Cartesian omni-skepticism is Camus’s existentialism (ca.1940–1950), which transfers the cogito from epistemology to the sphere ofvalues. In his dramatized language, the only fundamental issue is suicide,because this calls into question all values of living. But the very impulse tonihilism reveals its limits: I reject the world as meaningless; therefore a standardof meaning exists. Breaking through to the social dimension, Camus goes on:I rebel, therefore we, a moral community, exist.The cogito is found in many world networks but not all. There is no famoususe of the cogito in China; this is not surprising, given the fact that its networksdid not progress very far in the epistemology-metaphysics sequence. Nor dowe find the cogito in Greek philosophy (at least as far as we know, which isto say that it never made an important part of the attention space); it occursonly with Augustine, at the very end, about 1,000 years (30 generations) afterThales. In India there is no notable use of the cogito during the time span thatcorresponds to the Greek networks; if we count from the time of the Upan-Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 817ishadic world ingredient philosophers, Shankara appears in about the fortiethgeneration. This is somewhat later than Augustine but on a par with Ibn Sina,insofar as we count Islamic falsafa as a continuation of the Greek network.The cogito is a development fairly deep into the medieval segment of thesequence, which is not to say it became outdated thereafter; the sophisticatedabstractions attained in medieval religious garb became permanent acquisitionsfor later secularist versions.A thoroughgoing omni-skepticism is a deep trouble, the counterpart to theregulative ideal, the most central sacred object of intellectual life, the ideal ofabsolute truth.14 That is why skepticism is repeatedly revived, even thoughhardly anyone is ever convinced by it. The “great philosophers” are those whofind a variant on the same reflexive deep troubles; hence the kinship in thesolutions which they pose to them, even though these too are not uniform, butfall into the oppositional pattern characteristic of intellectual space.long-term fractionation over the categories of realityOver the long term, the major intellectual driving force is the dynamics oforganizationally sustained debate. Factions which keep their identities duringmany generations of argument become locked into a long dance step with oneanother; increasingly impervious to outside influences and turned inward upontheir mutually constituted argumentative identities, they drive the collectiveconscience of the intellectual attention space repeatedly to new heights ofabstract self-reflection. To illustrate how this unfolds the epistemology-metaphysicssequence, let us sketch the sequence in India.The Indian Sequence. We can distinguish five periods:1. From about 700 to 400 b.c.e., the breaking apart of the Vedic schoolsinto multi-sided competition among Upanishadic and heterodox sages. Theintellectual content consists in rival claims as to the cosmological ingredientsunderlying the visible world. At the end of this period, Buddhism becomes thedominant school. The Buddha’s winning stroke is to explain that the seemingpermanence of objects and of the self are transitory aggregates, and to identifyspiritual liberation with detachment from the illusory. The strand of skepticismwhich had emerged in the overcrowded attention space is incorporated intothe Buddhist synthesis as an intellectual motivation to detach oneself from theworld through meditation. The dominance of Buddhism during the formativeperiod of Indian abstract philosophy made Sañjaya’s skepticism into its rulingframe; with the external decline of Buddhism, Advaita took over its basic stancefor the Hindu side.From the point of view of Western thought, the premise that the world isan illusion tends to reduce Indian philosophy to merely sectarian or historicalinterest. To approach Indian philosophy in this way is to miss its technical so-818 • Meta-reflectionsphistication, which is transposable outside the religious frame. The same canbe said about medieval Islamic and Christian philosophy, where the conceptof God is not merely a matter of dogma; it is philosophically fruitful becauseit operates as an epistemological ideal (perfect knowledge), and an ideal ofmetaphysical ultimates (infinite causal power, ultimate ontological foundation,and so on).In the dominant Buddhist and Hindu schools, the critique of illusion holdsprestige as the path to higher religious insight. This is also the driving force ofthe epistemology-metaphysics sequence in Indian philosophy. The premise ofworld illusion is the basic challenge, the locus of arguments. It can be regardedas an institutionalized skepticism about the reality of objects. At first discussionconcerns the underlying ingredients which undercut surface appearances; subsequentdebate goes on to critique the reality of the ingredients as well. Indianrealists, Idealists, and those who held that metaphysical ultimates are inexpressibleall had to deal with the challenge of this institutionalized skepticism,this perennially available weapon wielded against any assertions whatever. Anassertion as to the reality of anything could always be met by the charge thatit was a move away from religious enlightenment.Freed from the religious animus—and there were times, especially at theheight of cosmopolitan debates, when philosophers seemed only nominallyreligious—the same skeptical claim held up an abstract standard as to how thephilosophical game would be played. In point of fact, considerable portions ofIndian philosophy have not regarded the world in general as illusory. All ofthe Hindu darshanas before the rise of Advaita non-dualism rested validknowledge on sensory perception of material objects. The Abhidharma wingof Buddhist philosophers also generally accepted various world elements asreal, denying only the mentally imposed reifications of permanent objects andof the self—a position which is not so different from that of a modern physicist.Even after Shankara, Advaita opponents flourished by taking their stand onthe reality of the world. Intellectual life plays out by oppositions. The worldillusion issue in the Indian debates meant that realist positions too would beexplicated with epistemological sharpness.The question of illusion required all of Indian philosophy to grapple withepistemology. That is why, once we abstract it from its religious garb, Indianphilosophy is so rich in the themes that characterize the deepest puzzles of theGreek-Christian-European sequence.2. From about 400 b.c.e. to 200 c.e., the philosophical splits among Buddhistsects, culminating with the rise of Mahayana and Nagarjuna’s dialecticalnegation. Extending the time period to about 350 c.e., still keeping within theunfolding of Buddhist sectarian rivalries, we can include the rise of Yogacara,making Buddhism a full-fledged idealism.It will be convenient to combine this period with the next.Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 8193. From about 100 to 500 c.e., the growth of the main Hindu darshanas(Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Samkhya, Yoga, Mimamsa, all except late-bloomingAdvaita); this is also the time of Buddhist-Hindu confrontation, the debatesacross a now-unified attention space.Several explicitly epistemological-metaphysical themes now become theobject of debate. Typically the issue is raised first between the Buddhist sects,then crops up within the Hindu darshanas, through confrontations that driveinitially inchoate schools of thought into increasingly polarized positions onphilosophical turf.Nominalism and realism, universals and particulars arose as issues amongthe early Buddhist schools. How do the lists of world ingredients in theAbhidharma compilations stand the test of illusion? The Sarvastivada, the“everything-exists-theory,” holds that all the dharma elements are real, by warrantof the intentionality of consciousness: the mind never has a true cognitionwithout an object. The Sarvastivadins’ debating partners, the Sautrantikas,pointed to an inconsistency in treating non-concrete categories on the samelevel as material substances; they supported a nominalism of abstract categorieson a non-referential aspect of mind. As the notion of universals emerged, otherBuddhist schools attacked it, declaring that the only reals are particulars,indeed the inexpressible suchness (tathata) which was to become a hallmarkof certain forms of Buddhist mysticism. Carrying this argument to an extreme,Nagarjuna held that all dharmas (world constituents) are void; none containsany self-essence at all.The Hindu schools crystallized on a similar level of abstraction. The Nyayaschool of logic took a nominalist stance, holding the conventionalism of worldmeanings. The Vaisheshika category scheme lists substance and quality, plus ahierarchy of universals and particulars of various levels of generality parallelingAristotle’s genera and species. Now debate with the Buddhists kicked in, raisingcritical questions: How can bare substances exist without any qualities? Howcan there be relations between substances and their qualities without an infiniteregress of intermediating connectors? By around 550, the Nyaya-Vaisheshikaalliance had backed off from early nominalism and was taking a stance ofincreasingly intransigent realism: relations are real; relations among relationsare real; even non-existence is real. Debate was polarizing into positions ofworld illusion and pluralist realism.Causality and potentiality became sites of argument over the reality andplurality of substance. Nagarjuna had pointed up the problem by defining thereal as that which is causally efficacious. Therefore, since everything is linkedin a chain of causes, nothing is independently real, possessing its own nature.There are no universals and no substance. Out of this stance the Yogacaraschool propounded a full-fledged Idealism: what appear to be world objects820 • Meta-reflectionsare supplied by the mind, which imposes the relation of externality on subjectiveideas.Parallel problems over causality arose on the Hindu side. Samkhya was hitby Buddhist criticism of conundrums in its dualistic metaphysics. If a materialworld substance is posited, along with a pure detached witness consciousnesslooking down upon it, how are these separate and distinct substances related?Samkhya seems to have made repairs by making the witness consciousness evermore detached, and incorporating the empirical and dynamic aspects of mindin the material substance. Critics attacked this too: If substance is permanentand at rest, why does it ever set itself in motion? This is equivalent to the deeptrouble uncovered by Parmenides, the turning point to higher abstraction inGreek philosophy. Samkhya responded with a solution parallel to Aristotle’s:substance includes latency or potentiality; the world substance periodicallyextrudes the visible world, like a tortoise putting out its claws.A deep trouble locates a fruitful spot, where layers of debate build up.These arguments echo throughout Indian philosophy. Positions are taken onthe side of satkaryavada, which holds that the effect preexists in the materialcause, and asatkaryavada—that causes and effects are distinct entities, andthese cannot be connected, because that would reduce one substance to another.The Vaisheshika pluralists took the latter position, holding that latencydoes not exist, and that new combinations of ingredients lead to completelynew entities. The division cropped up on the Buddhist side as well: an earlyinter-sectarian dispute was whether past, present, and future exist independently,or whether all are contained in the earlier existent. Nagarjuna eliminatedtime and substance entirely, opting in effect for monism, whereas YogacaraIdealism held that all plurality derives from seeds of potentiality in thestorehouse consciousness. Later, after the big realignment of positions removingboth Samkhya and Buddhism from the field, Advaita (“non-dualism”) tookover the Samkhya satkaryavada stance (effects preexist in the cause), eliminatingthe embarrassment of dual substances and elevating Parmenidean immutabilityto a purer monism. Debate did not end here; the deep troubles ofplurality and change were exploited repeatedly in each subsequent round ofIndian philosophical creativity. The same deep troubles were exploited in theWest: Spinoza and Leibniz, later Bradley and Russell, worked through thefacets of the satkaryavada puzzle; the occasionalist question, raised both inIslamic theology and in post-Cartesian Europe, is another variant on theplurality of substances problem.4. The height of the Buddhist-Hindu confrontation, when their networkscross and their positions mix and transform (500–800 c.e.). The deep troublesof the previous generations are recombined. Again the nominalism versusuniversals controversy provides fertile grounds. Bhartrihari—a cosmopolitanSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 821Hindu in the Buddhist camp—attacked Nyaya-Vaisheshika pluralist realismand its identification of each word with a self-subsistent reality. Rather, he held,there is a transcendent unit of meaning behind the spoken word; words makemerely artificial distinctions within a wordless, undifferentiated reality. Bhartrihariwas a professional grammarian, for whom language was no mere collectionof names but a processual system. Combining grammar with a primalreligious ground, Bhartrihari depicts the world as constituted by Brahmanspeaking, introducing differentiation into the undifferentiated; time emerges inthe eternal through grammatical tenses. Expanding far beyond static nominalism,grammar is ontologized. Bhartrihari’s language-centered philosophy contrastswith the Platonic emanation of the world from Forms in the highest One.In the case of the Greeks, the technical inspiration comes from geometry,thereby giving a static and eternal image of the Forms, whereas Bhartrihari’smodel is based on syntax, giving a dynamic slant to the formal aspect of realitywhile his religious motivation is to identify language with world illusion.Bhartrihari was followed up on the Buddhist side by Dignaga, who continuedthe attack on the realist and sensory epistemologies of the Hindu schools.Sense perception is always of particulars; names are universals, and universalsdo not exist. Dignaga continued to defend Buddhist turf, dissolving the realityof ordinary objects by revealing them as mere “name-and-form.” Language isthe source of illusion, making permanences out of evanescent particulars.Dignaga introduced negation as the central process of world construction.Concepts are universals, encompassing all their instances; but the all can neverbe shown. Hence words only demarcate one thing from another by negation;a cow is at best a “not-not-cow.” The undifferentiated unity of reality is dividedinto illusory concretenesses by the negation inherent in verbal thought.15The last great Buddhist philosopher, Dharmakirti, combines themes fromNagarjuna and Dignaga into an epistemological-metaphysical synthesis. Realityis that which is causally efficacious. Entities are differentiations imposed bythe mind, and are unreal because the causal chain cannot be broken into bits.The world really exists and is not constructed by the mind, but it is not to beidentified with ordinary objects, which are mental constructs. Dharmakirti usesa variant of the argument against the reality of relations (something likeLeibniz’s labyrinth of the continuum) to arrive at a position which parallelsKant’s inconceivable thing-in-itself; but the ontological emphasis is shifted, inthe Buddhist point of view, to deny any validity to the categories of theunderstanding. Time and space are unreal; the categories are the source ofillusion.On the Hindu side of the field, upgrading to a high level of abstraction andreflexivity came about as a previously ultra-conservative school, the Mimamsa,822 • Meta-reflectionsentered the debates. Mimamsa defended the old Vedic rituals against the newermeditative and theist religions. In order to explain how rituals could havemagical effects—and simultaneously to deny the efficacy of any other religiouspractice—around 600 c.e. the Mimamsa philosophers formulated a magicalreligiousversion of the causality argument, holding that each person has a soulsubstance, which accumulates karmic potentialities through ritual action. Thisled the Mimamsa leaders onto the territory of current debates over the natureof substance. Kumarila held that abstractions are real; negation, made centralby Dharmakirti, is itself a real entity. A dissident in the Mimamsa camp,Prabhakara held that reality is always positive, and negation is not ontologicalbut only a logical inference; there is no negation in general, but only ofparticulars. From these discussions Indian philosophy broke into the territoryof critical epistemology.Like other Indian schools, Mimsaka accepted sensory perception as a validsource of knowledge; since the school was concerned to show that long-distancecausal processes (such as the accumulation of karma) are also valid, itbecame an important issue to show how errors in perception occur. The generalissue of validity was explicitly raised: since everything is known throughconsciousness, there is no criterion of valid knowledge outside of consciousness.Prabhakara held that a perceptual illusion (mistaking a coiled rope for asnake) shows not that perceptual consciousness is false, but only that one’ssecond look (seeing the rope) reveals that the first look (seeing the snake) wasnot a simple perception but the intrusion of memories or inferences. Thevalidity of cognition cannot be undermined, as its validity is given only byitself. (A version of the argument was later used by G. E. Moore against theabstract entities postulated by the logical formalists as in Russell’s mathematicalset theory or Wittgenstein’s Tractatus.) Kumarila by contrast held thatperceptual error comes from the imposition of a non-presence (a snake-memory)on a reality (the rope); since negations are also real, even errors areperceptions of reality, leaving to be specified only what form the reality takes.Debate between Prabhakara and Kumarila led to the formulation of anIndian version of “cogito ergo sum.” The former held that the “I” is subject,never an object, and thus cannot be the object of knowledge. The latter heldthat the “I” emerges from inference, and thus is a valid form of knowledge.Reflexivity becomes an explicit topic. Shankara now turns the Mimamsamaneuvers in defense of worldly realism into a pathway to secure a transcendentreality. Taking over Prabhakara’s self-validity of cognitive experience, henotes that even doubt over reality implies a ground from which the doubt isformulated; this self-luminescent ground at the root of consciousness is behindall differentiations of worldly experience.Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 823Shankara’s cogito opens up simultaneously a new metaphysics and anepistemology. The ground of consciousness is the highest metaphysical andreligious reality. Adopting the position that the effect preexists in the cause(i.e., following Nagarjuna and Dharmakirti in opposing a plurality of causallyefficacious substances), Shankara holds that the Absolute is undifferentiatedfrom the world. We cannot say that the world holds any duality. But whatof the duality of the Absolute vis-à-vis the ordinary world of experience?Shankara elaborates an epistemology of levels of truth. Nagarjuna, encounteringthe problem from the point of view of his omni-skepticism, had called hisown position a theory of no-theory. To put it another way, there is two-foldtruth: the worldly level on which arguments are made, and the level of ultimatereality, which is inexpressible. Shankara elaborates this into three-fold levels:the inexpressible Absolute, about which we can only say that it is non-dual;the ordinary world, which is an illusion only from the standpoint of theAbsolute; and finally the level of perceptual errors (snakes which are reallyropes), as seen from the worldly standpoint.5. From 800 c.e. through the 1500s: the post-Buddhist period of debatesamong the victorious Hindu schools. This is the most neglected period ofIndian philosophy, with a reputation for religious sectarianism and anti-rationalbhakti faith. The sectarian trend was real enough; during a time whenEuropean networks were separating theology from philosophy and then undergoingradical secularization, Indian philosophy was increasingly absorbedinto disputes on behalf of particularistic theological positions. After 1600 a“lumpy syncretism” sets in, in opposition to Muslim conquerors and Europeancolonialists, amalgamating every position under the banner of a bhaktizedAdvaita aconceptualism. Nevertheless, down through the 1300s at least, intellectualcompetition among the schools remains sharp. Even when new theistcults are established, they usually advertise their presence in the attention spaceby disputing the metaphysical tenets of their established rivals. For a while theshift toward sectarianism acts as a series of shocks to the external base,stimulating philosophical creativity. If we take the pains to seek it out beneaththe theological trappings, we find in this period the mature phase of Indianphilosophy, its highest level of acuteness of the epistemology-metaphysicssequence.In the Advaita camp, Shri Harsha and Chitsukha took the offensive againstrealists, mustering arguments paralleling Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. There canbe no knowledge of an object apart from the act of knowing it; to assumeindependent reality lands one in the contradiction of knowing before oneknows. Substances are never perceived, but only qualities; yet how can qualitiesact upon one another? There followed an argument made famous in the West824 • Meta-reflectionsby Bradley: substance and quality cannot be related, since the relations of anyrelation to its terms leads to an infinite regress. All concepts—being, cause,relation, quality—lead to contradictions. Chitsukha embraced solipsism, sincethe self is the only item not reduced to illusion. Later, in the 1500s, Prakashanandaformulated Advaita as a Berkeleyesque subjectivism, in which objectscome into existence only when they are perceived.The Advaita opponents responded by extending the heritage of disputesover nominalism and realism. Shri Harsha’s anti-conceptualism rested on destructionof categories, that is, of universals; Madhva countered that everything,even God, is particular. The basic feature of reality is the power ofeverything to be itself, paralleling Duns Scotus’s haecceitas formulated in themedieval Christian debate over universal and particular being. Madhva assertedthat the universals of non-transient entities are themselves transient,elevating particularism to the highest ontological level. Again this parallels theposition of Scotus and Ockham, that universals are only a filter through whichlimited human consciousness sees the world; the perfect epistemological standpoint,God, sees everything in its particularity.Other Indian philosophers rang a series of changes on the tensions withinthe concept of fundamental substance, here formulated as God or the worldground. Ramanuja invoked the epistemological arguments that inner experienceis self-validating, and that consciousness always intends an object, concludingthat consciousness always involves a real plurality. The one reality,Brahman, includes plurality as the relation between substance and its attributes.Nimbarka responded that duality cannot be an attribute of non-dualitybecause attributes distinguish a substance from other substances, yet only onesubstance exists. His solution is a version of Spinoza’s dual-aspect monism,transposed from mental and material into a self-identical aspect and an energizing-potentiality aspect.The apex of Indian philosophy around 1100–1300, including Shri Harsha,Chitsukha, Ramanuja, Madhva, and Nimbarka, includes many points parallelto European thought from Duns Scotus through Spinoza, Leibniz, Berkeley,Hume, Kant, Idealists such as Bradley, even Bergson and Heidegger—a periodfrom about 1200 to 1900.16 Obviously there is no strict parallel in the unfoldingof these arguments in chronological sequence. This is only to be expected,since there are multiple social causes of ideas, and different combinations ofinternal oppositions and external shocks occurred in India and Europe. Someof the sequence of external causes were running in reverse: European intellectuallife was becoming more secularized, India more absorbed in sectarianreligion; hence the territory of Idealism, which is a halfway house betweenuniversalistic and particularistic religious stances, was traversed in differentSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 825directions. What we see is a complex of ideas on the same general level ofabstraction and reflexivity, which are shared out among the opposing intellectualfactions in the network.Nominalism versus Realism of Universals. Certain topics emerge in everyworld network during the epistemology-metaphysics sequence. The issue ofuniversals arises early in both India and Greece, as soon as the cosmologysequence has been upgraded to abstract consideration of epistemology. InChina, too, where the epistemology-metaphysics sequence does not get veryfar, the School of Names at the climax of the intense debates during the ancientWarring States appears to raise the nominalist-realist issue for a brief period.To postulate universals is explicitly to recognize abstraction; thus it is notsurprising that the topic should arise virtually everywhere as one of the firstmetaphysical questions. For how many generations debate continues on thisterritory varies considerably, owing to external social conditions.In India, universals are formulated noncontroversially as an item in theBuddhist Abhidharma lists. Debate arose as abstract entities were attackedwithin the Buddhist schools, first as nominal, then by an argument for radicalparticularism: that the “suchness” of reality is inexpressible. The attack onuniversals occurs repeatedly down through the medieval period of Indianphilosophy. As the attention space was divided between Buddhist and Hinduschools, the former staked its turf ever more sharply on the destruction of anyrealist position, including mild ones encompassing both universals and particulars.The Hindu schools played their part in the polarization by taking increasinglyintransigeant stances, reifying virtually every new abstraction as it wasdiscovered. After Buddhism disappeared and its cultural capital was re-dividedon the Hindu side, the theological disputes between Advaita and the theistschools resurrected the issue of universals and particulars as tools for arguingover the tensions inherent in the concept of a single highest substance.In Greek philosophy, the concept of universals emerges early, but oppositionto it is neither very prolonged nor radical. The limited nominalism of theSophists was directed not against concepts in general, but against the morespecific concepts of the ethical virtues. This debate catalyzed Plato to formulatethe very general concept of abstract Form. Antisthenes and his successors theCynics for a while opposed universal forms with a version of nominalism, butmore generally from distrust of all intellectual constructions; these schoolsfaded away into skepticism, holding no doctrines at all. Aristotle’s compromisearranged a hierarchy of generality from the most encompassing universal downthrough those of more limited scope to concrete particulars, and identifiedparticular beings with primary substance, universals with secondary substancewhich cannot exist apart from particulars.826 • Meta-reflectionsThe question as to the relative reality of one pole or the other becomesmoot in the Hellenistic period. Aristoteleanism was generally absorbed intothe Middle Platonist systems, which identified the hierarchy of abstraction withthe cosmology of emanations from the highest universal to the lowest particular.In the Neoplatonism of late antiquity, the reality status of the bottomsensory realm was so low that it was barely regarded as having any being atall. Plotinus formulated a new level at the top of the hierarchy, above the highestForm of the Middle Platonists, transcending intellect and being. This wasthe first philosophical Greek mysticism in the sense of Buddhist radical ineffability;but the mystical ground was still the fount from which emanate theForms. Universals continued to be regarded as the closest approach to thereligious peak, the opposite of the Buddhist view of universals as the sourceof worldly illusion.Here we see how important Christianity is in changing the direction ofWestern philosophy. The challenge to Neoplatonism mounted by Christianitytended to break the identification of universals with reality, opening the wayto the nominalism-realism debate. We see a first flurry at the end of the paganera, when Christian thinkers emphasized the concrete reality of the materialworld and Jesus’ incarnation, and rejected the purely intellectual conceptionof salvation in pagan Neoplatonism. Aristoteleanism, which in its original formprovided at least a moderate opposition to the dominance of Platonic universals,was revived, and questions of the relative standing of universals andparticulars was raised, first by Alexander of Aphrodisias (ca. 200 c.e.), thenmost influentially in Boethius’s textbook (about 510).With the collapse of literate culture at the end of the Roman Empire, theNeoplatonic amalgamation of Plato and Aristotle sweeps over Christian philosophy.The reviving waves of learning in the Christian Middle Ages reopenedthe tensions. The first debates we hear about in the Carolingian period weredisputes between mild nominalism and extreme realism of universals. Againafter a decline in external conditions, when intellectual life came alive after1000, the wandering debaters (Lanfranc, Berengar, Roscelin, the immediatepredecessors of Anselm and Abelard) established their turf on the question ofnominalism and universals; these debates culminated with Abelard, who proposeda compromise doctrine (“conceptualism”) giving a more complex versionof the epistemological process of formulating abstractions.Then Christian philosophy switches gears. The nominalism-realism debatewas the field warming up; now the level of abstraction was pushed upward tomore elaborate metaphysical systems. Since these mostly built on Neoplatonicmaterials, universals became predominant again for three generations, andnominalism dropped out. This had nothing to do with the external pressuresof Christian doctrine. Some nominalists got into heresy trouble for interpretingSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 827the three Persons of the Trinity as merely nominal, but so did their opponentswho treated the Trinity as three abstract reals. The nominalism-realism disputewas driven by purely internal dynamics of intellectual networks. When theissue reemerged, it was because conflicts over metaphysical turf had come tothe point of pushing beyond Neoplatonism.Aquinas disowns the implication that salvation occurs through the intellectby participation in the sphere of general ideas. He leaves intact the hierarchyof spheres of abstraction, but undercuts their importance by separating ontologicaland epistemological grounds, arguing that humans lack the ability toapprehend directly the world of universals, and instead know things onlythrough particulars. Aquinas was a compromiser, but his new mixed formulationoverthrew the Platonist ontological hierarchy and gave primacy to existenceover essence (i.e., universal form). It was in response to this move thatHenry of Ghent (see note 15) formulated his doctrine that individuality ismerely a web of negations, against the backdrop of the higher reality ofpositively existing Forms. Duns Scotus, in turn, trumped all the rival positionsby declaring that the essence of a thing is neither universal nor particular, butdepends on a general principle of particularity, what he calls haecceitas, “thisness.”By this route Christian philosophy, having cast off the Neoplatonicposition which identified highest religious reality with universals, finally cameinto parallel with Nagarjuna, Dharmakirti, and the Buddhists with a conceptionof radically inexpressible particularity. The way was opened to an aconceptualChristian mysticism, and at the same time to the revival of radicalnominalism such as that of William of Ockham.In the Islamic sequence, debate over the question of nominalism and realismbreaks out via clashes between indigenous Muslim theologians and the Neoplatonists—the equivalent of the clash between Christian anthropomorphismand the Greek heritage. Al-Farabi (early 900s) imported these conceptions intothe branch of Islamic philosophers who continued the Greek traditions, butthese Muslim falasifa were generally Neoplatonists and followed the party lineon the superior reality of universals; what al-Farabi added was to formulatethe issue as a distinction between existence and essence. In the same generationas al-Farabi, the theologian al-AshÀari argued that there are no universalessences but only concrete and particular facts. Three generations later, thethemes of Neoplatonism and Islamic rational theology were brought togetherby Ibn Sina, who formulated the concept of contingent being, merely possiblein itself but made necessary as the result of an external cause. That is to say,the lower world participates in the necessity characteristic of the realm oflogical universals, but only in a derivative way, through the causal operationof the one being necessary in itself, namely, God.Ibn Sina’s contingency sharpens the sense in which the realm of particular828 • Meta-reflectionsbeing is real. Seizing the advantage, the AshÀarite lineage continued to hammeraway against the notion that reality is structured by universals or forcesoperating according to universal principles. Al-Juwayni argued that if an objecthas particular characteristics but could have had others, there must be somethingcausing it to be particularized. This cause, which al-Juwayni identifiedwith God, may be regarded as an abstraction on the concept of particularity,equivalent to Duns Scotus’s haecceitas or Buddhist “thusness.” Al-Ghazali,al-Juwayni’s pupil, went on to refute Ibn Sina by arguing against the notionof necessary cause, using arguments against causality parallel to Hume’s: IbnSina’s notion of contingency is not radical enough, and needs to be extendedto the point where we see that even causality is particular, the sheer acts ofGod’s will. The arbitrary power of God to establish or disestablish any generalprinciples at all, stressed by both Duns Scotus and al-Juwayni, is a veryhigh-level claim about fundamental ontology; the same assertion would resurfacein Heidegger’s “thrown-ness” of the world and Sartre’s point that thenature of being is to be unfounded, without any reason for anything to existin the first place.This radical conception of particularity emerges at various times in theworld networks, in sequences of debate against systems which make universalsinto the ontological centerpiece.17 But radical particularity too is never sustainedfor long without answering strokes in the intellectual field. It is anextreme, anchored against an opposing extreme of realism of universals, anddisappears along with its enemy. Buddhist Madhyamika, made popular byNagarjuna, sustained its radical “thusness” only as long as it had Hindu realistsas a foil, and even so was answered on its own side by Yogacara Idealism,whose seeds in the mind are the equivalent of universal forms. Scotism,encircling its radical haecceitas in a bastion of high-level abstractions, fadedfrom focus in the intellectual attention space of the 1300s and 1400s.In Europe, the history of nominalism-realism picks up once again in the1600s, but in much moderated form. Extreme claims for either transcendentuniversals or inexpressible particulars gave way to compromises which attemptedto show how experience of particular things allows persons to formulatenames, or general ideas, which stand for the resemblance among things.The terminology changed along with the center of ontological gravity; “realism”now meant the reality not of universals but of the material world. Sinceall issues are driven by conflict, proponents of universals were a crucial partof the field of oppositions which set off the debate. Neoplatonism had madea comeback during the Renaissance, when the metaphysical advances of themedieval Schoolmen were rejected in the name of reviving classical antiquity;once again in a revolt against Neoplatonism, the nominalist critique came tothe fore.Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 829Hobbes attaches his nominalism to the ontology of material substance;this in turn opens still further controversies. The Cambridge Platonists sprangto the defense of religion by attacking belief in a material reality, as if it couldbe known without going through subjective ideas. Locke in turn (who appearsat the intersection of the networks of both the Cambridge Neoplatoniccircle and the Hobbesian-Cartesian materialists) put forward a moderatedversion of sensory empiricism. Locke recognized not only particular sensoryexperiences but also particular ideas which come from them, followed bygeneral ideas which arise by abstracting the resemblances among particularideas. The difficulties which Locke opened up (as to in what sense resemblancemay be understood) became fruitful ground for a number of other philosophiesin the next generations of his network, including those of Berkeley (whorejected the realist underpinnings entirely) and Hume (who ended with thedefense of commonsense realism as resting on nothing but psychological propensities).Difficulties in accounting for the universal aspect in experience haveremained unsolved; after Hume the attention space of Western philosophersgenerally turned to other disputes.We could make another set of world comparisons about recurrent deeptroubles found in the Indian sequence, such as the relations among multiplesubstances. Such issues are even more obviously entwined with the dynamicsof religious positions. This brings us to the third major cause driving theepistemology-metaphysics sequence.monotheism as philosophers’ puzzleA long-standing tradition holds theist religion inimical to intellectual advance.The historical consciousness of liberal anglophone philosophy takes its signpostsfrom a series of disputes along this divide, from Abelard’s condemnationfor heresy, down through the triumphantly secularized schools of the 1930sand thereafter. This conception makes for poor sociology of ideas, reducing amulti-dimensional process of structured oppositions into a single-line evolution,and all too glibly identifying that line with rationality and with empiricalscience.The onset of rapid-discovery science in Europe provided a jolt leading toa renewed round of philosophical creativity, but this was essentially a separationof networks and a shift in the organizational base, leading to internalrealignment in the philosophical attention space; contrary to the ideologies ofcontemporary philosophers, it was not the substitution of scientific method forcore philosophical tools and puzzles. The revolution of rapid-discovery sciencehappened to coincide with the period of European secularization in the stalemateof religious conflicts; and still later the wresting of control of the universitybase from theologians into the hands of research scholars—philosophers,scientists, and humanists alike—generated a united front ideology of the forces830 • Meta-reflectionsof “reason” against those of theological traditionalism. These were alliancesof convenience, ephemeral over the long run, and their ideologies held noinsight into the deeper oppositional pattern that drives philosophical creativity.The disputes recurring in the West along the lines of faith versus reasonwere by no means a battlefront of progressive and traditionalistic forces,whatever their conscious self-identifications. The abstraction-reflexivity sequenceis driven by conflict and by the discovery of deep troubles. Rationalismby itself is often glib and in its own way traditionalistic, for instance, in theattachment of medieval Averroists to their aging texts, or in the backwardlookingstance of the Renaissance Humanists. It was the reemergence of thecultural capital of high scholasticism in the era of Descartes and Leibniz thatgot philosophy moving again. It is the dispute between faith and reason thatis crucial for philosophical and especially epistemological advance, not thevictory of one side or the other.18 The pattern occurs repeatedly: Kant’s creationof a new level of critical epistemology happened in the heart of battle overtheological control of the organizational base of intellectual life. This was notthe extreme rejection of metaphysics by Enlightenment-style secular intellectuals,but a move within the contested terrain of faith and reason, a deep puzzleplayed through again fruitfully on a higher level of abstraction. Again in veryrecent times, Heidegger’s existentialism comes from tension between neo-orthodoxtheology and the “rigorous science” of phenomenology.Contrary to the ideologies of both its proponents and opponents, conservatismcannot help being dynamic. Conservatism is a recurrent mediatingmoment in the epistemology-metaphysics sequence, whenever conditions allowcompetition among intellectual factions. A community of curators of thecanonical texts always produces a faction of rationalists, pursuing the normalscholastic tendency toward systematic classification and conceptual consistency.Conservatism is not primordial. The emergence of a conservative consciousness,explicitly aware of the particularity of tradition, is a response tothe prior existence of rationalists. This split is part of the normal dynamics ofthe intellectual life.The battle between faith and reason is an impetus to epistemology, since itraises explicitly the question of the nature and source of knowledge. Often itis the conservatives, the theological particularists, who push toward criticalepistemology, attacking the confidently taken-for-granted tools of the constructivemetaphysicians. In Islamic philosophy, it was from the theologically conservativecamp that al-Ghazali and Ibn Taymiyah raised acute questions aboutthe bases of reason and Ibn Khaldun attacked the scholasticism of syllogisticmethod. In India, it was the most conservative school, the Mimamsa, literalistcurators of the Vedic texts, who made the most explicit moves into epistemologyand set off the higher flights of Hindu philosophical abstraction.The tensions which drive upward the epistemology-metaphysics sequenceSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 831come out most strongly when religious orthodoxy is politically enforced monotheism.In this context appear the entwining of epistemology and metaphysicsin proofs of metaphysical arguments, and the opening up of the basic questionsof substance and relation, causality and free will, being and contingency. Thisis why there is such a gulf in the level of abstraction between Chinese thoughtand that of the West (including both Islamic and Christian branches). In China,where state-enforced supremacy of a monotheist church never took place, amajor pathway to metaphysical development is missing. In India, state-supportedreligious monopoly was usually absent, and the decentralizing structureswhich promoted meditative mysticism had the effect of turning philosophicalargument in different directions than in the monotheist West. AsIndian philosophy, from the medieval period onward, became increasinglytheist, epistemological and metaphysical parallels to the West increased as well.Proofs of God. Anthropomorphic monotheism produces high levels of tensionin intellectual argument and leads to theological proofs. This process raises thelevel of philosophical abstraction and generates movement in the epistemology-metaphysics sequence. As comparative evidence, we may note the virtualabsence of proofs of God in Chinese philosophy. The gods of the Taoistpantheon, and the popular deities sponsored under the umbrella of the Confucianstate rites, have no qualities of infinite perfection nor world-creatingpower, and call for no abstract argument as to their existence. The cosmosgeneratingSupreme Ultimate of Neo-Confucianism is not the object of proofeither; and Chu Hsi rejects both immortality and existence of spirits. As inother respects, early Chinese philosophy had an opportunity to take a differentpath. The Heaven cult of the early Confucians had already transcended anthropomorphicqualities (even the conception of the Mandate of Heaven is animpersonal cosmic rightness of political rulership); its fusion with the divinationcosmologies in the Han dynasty reinforced its impersonal quality and itsidentification with the cosmos rather than its transcendence. The Mohists, asusual, could have made a difference. Against the impersonal cult of Heavenand Destiny they exalted a personal God, rewarding the righteous and punishingsinners, with ghosts as avengers of evil. The Mohists critiqued the Heaven-Destiny conception for its fatalism, opening an early argument for free will. Itis possible that in the obscure middle period of the Mohists, the five generationsbetween Mo Ti and the formulation of the Mohist Canon, the basics of Mohistlogic arose from conflicts over religious faith and mutual accusations of heresyamong its schismatic factions. Mohist monotheism and formal logic wenttogether. Both were cut off by the destruction of the Mohist school in the Han,a turning point in the history of Chinese philosophy.The great development of proofs of God occur in three periods: Greek832 • Meta-reflectionsphilosophy from the pre-Socratics down through the Hellenistic Skeptics; theshowdown between late Neoplatonism and Christianity in the 400s c.e.; andthe growth of Islamic (and in parallel to it Jewish) philosophy from the earlyBaghdad and Basra schools of the 700s through 1200, culminating in thepositions of Ibn Sina, al-Ghazali, Ibn Rushd (Averroës), and Maimonides. Theclassic Greek period mixed together arguments pro and con polytheism, monotheism,and pantheism, without focus on a transcendent world-creating God.The first carefully articulated proofs on this terrain emerged with Proclus, atthe end of the Neoplatonic school, who argued against Christianity for theeternity of the world. His grandpupils Simplicius and John Philoponus, convertsto Christianity, refuted Neoplatonic arguments from the monotheist side.It was the synthesis between the networks of abstract philosophy and anthropomorphicChristian monotheism that generated these first comprehensiveproofs.19Islamic philosophy was no mere passive transmission belt for Greek philosophy.The first community of abstract argument comprised the indigenousdevelopment of kalam, rational theology, in the MuÀtazilite school. Itwas only after Islamic philosophy experienced a turning point, the rising powerof scriptural conservatives after 835, that MuÀtazilite creativity went on thedefensive, leaving a vacuum in the attention space into which Greek importswere now welcomed. The first rounds of Muslim philosophy centered onquestions of free will and predestination, and of proofs of the unity and justiceof God, arising directly from indigenous theological controversy. There developedan acute consciousness of what is proven and not proven. Various kindsof proofs of the existence of God were recognized, and distinguished fromproofs of the unity of God and of the creation of the world ex nihilo. Formationof a conservative opposition raised the level of abstraction, leading to acutediscussions of primary and secondary accidents, of the contingency of creation,of particularity as opposed to universals, and of causality. Ibn Sina created hisversion of the cogito in the competition over rising standards of proofs, addinghis distinctions of necessary, possible, and contingent being, to come up witha proof of God as being purely necessary in itself alone. Al-Ghazali is aresponse to Ibn Sina’s rationalism, Averroës a response to al-Ghazali. Themainline of the epistemology-metaphysics sequence in Islamic philosophy is aseries of moves along the debating space of proofs of God. In the Greeknetworks, and for later Christian philosophy, Simplicius and Philoponus areminor figures, receiving little attention; in medieval Muslim and Jewish philosophy,it is the formulators of the proofs of God who are the stars.When intellectual life came alive in medieval Christendom, proofs of Godbecame a standard turf for tests of philosophical skill, not primarily forconverting unbelievers but for precedence in the intellectual community. It wasSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 833a pure intellectual game; there was no premium on accepting proofs, andrejection of inadequacies of rival argument was taken as a mark of superiority.The philosophers of the High Middle Ages were no beginners in the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. They started off by appropriating what ancient capitalwas available, but turned it toward the distinctive puzzles of anthropomorphicmonotheist theology. Anselm, a law-trained debater, won the first greatmedieval reputation by raising the standards of argument, seeking a perfectproof contained in itself, without appeal to any empirical premise. The acutenessof philosophical abstraction was raised thereafter in conjunction withrefinements in the concept of God. The proofs marshaled by Aquinas, refinedby Duns Scotus, and rejected by Ockham and the nominalists were entwinedwith the metaphysical game. Although the arguments seemed to press theborders of heresy and sometimes outraged traditional relations between faithand reason, there was no question of jettisoning Christian theology for a purelysecular philosophy; the reasoned conception of God, opened up and dramatizedby the proof game, is the deep trouble space on which metaphysicaladvance is made.The same holds true in much of the secularizing period of Europeanphilosophy. From Descartes to Leibniz and Berkeley, God is a central item inthe reasoning contests of philosophy, played with new standards of argument.Anthropomorphic qualities are transcended on this refined level of abstraction;what is retained, and what makes the path to further abstract constructionpossible, are the standards of perfection embodied in the concepts of infiniteperfection. Secular science and the philosophies of pure reason and freedomeventually became movements for overthrowing theology. But this is a case ofthe offspring devouring the parent; the standards of omniscience, omnipotence,infinite freedom, and goodness explored by theology provide the conceptionstaken over by the scientific and philosophical goals of totally comprehensiveexplanation, perfect and complete causality, and the various ultimates of Idealistand post-Idealist philosophy. Even the skeptical and anti-foundationalpositions were formulated against this yardstick. Arguments over God are notatavisms in modern European philosophy, but the main pathway of the epistemology-metaphysics sequence.The most important comparison for testing the importance of anthropomorphicmonotheism is ancient Greece. Here was no political pressure toadhere to a sole God, much less a personalistic one; yet there were somedevelopments of theological proofs. The early development of cosmologicalphilosophy took place by critiquing polytheism or reinterpreting the multiplegods as natural elements. A second version of rationalizing mythologies wasforwarded by the Stoics, who conceived of divinity in a generalized sense asone of the world ingredients, developing arguments that the universe itself isan animate, rational being with an intelligent soul.834 • Meta-reflectionsA third direction was that taken by Plato, the tendency to conceive of atranscendent God on a metaphysical level above the empirical world, notimmanent within it, with human-like qualities of intelligence and providentforesight. Plato is only vacillatingly monotheist; as in Aristotle’s sharply delimitedproof from motion for the Unmoved Mover, Plato endows God with onlylimited powers, at best shaper or controller of the world, creator of neither theworld substance nor the eternal Forms. The Middle Platonists moved closer toconstructing a monotheism of reason, and tried various models by which formsemanate from the primal One; but these are generally ontological descriptionsrather than proofs, and slip off into pantheism.The inner arguments of the Greek philosophical network are one of thesources of the concept of monotheism. In general, the trend of the abstractionreflexivitysequence produces some components of monotheism, including theconcepts of metaphysical unification and transcendence of the empirical, andof epistemological and moral perfection. Greek philosophy developed a strandcapable of blending with the full-blooded anthropomorphic monotheism ofChristianity, and may even have promoted its spread. But there is no singlereligious tendency of philosophical networks; left to itself, Greek philosophywas just as likely to emphasize sheer naturalism (for a while), omni-skepticism,or pantheism.20The Greek networks are notable in world comparison for the popularityof counter-proofs against the existence of the gods or God. In fact, the negativeproofs were first on the ground, and their continued instigation prodded muchof the successive development of positive proofs. There were famous atheists,especially in the Megarian and Cyrenaic schools. The Academy, during itsskeptical phase (down through Carneades), made a staple out of argumentsagainst the religious proofs of the Stoics; this in turn stimulated still furthercounter-proofs from the Middle Stoics. The Skeptic school took ammunitionfrom the balance of inconclusive arguments on both sides. These argumentscontributed modestly to sharpening the level of conceptual abstraction, forinstance, as the Megarians forced the Stoics to distinguish a dimension ofrelative and absolute perfections.On the whole, these arguments did not drive philosophical developmentwith anything like the centrality that proofs of God had for Islamic, Jewish,and Christian philosophy. As late as Sextus Empiricus (200 c.e.), argumentsover the polytheist gods were mixed indiscriminately with those concerningmonotheism. Even concerning the latter, arguments were often at a low levelof abstraction, as in the anti-Stoic arguments that the proof from motion makesthe Divine into a material body sharing the imperfect qualities of the materialworld. This concreteness was due to the continuing political presence ofpolytheism. The main external pressures against philosophical arguments camefrom affronts to the polytheist cults, both early (the charges for which SocratesSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 835died, as well as the scandals of the Sophists and Cyrenaics) and late (thepolytheist defense against Christianity in the later Roman Empire). Not untilChristianity became politically dominant did high-order metaphysical proofsof God begin to drive the epistemology-metaphysics sequence.India provides another useful comparison. Proofs of the existence of Godwere not prominent until the 700s c.e., notably with Shankara. This was theperiod when Buddhism was declining and its place in the abstract regions ofthe philosophical attention space was being taken by the Hindu schools. Theoccasion has some analogy to the takeover of philosophy by Christianity inthe 400s from the Neoplatonists; both of the previously dominant philosophicalschools were non-anthropomorphic transcendental mysticism, which in thecase of Buddhism was explicitly atheist. Shankara, who took the lead withinHinduism, is a network offshoot of the Mimamsakas. This school of scripturalliteralists, in their struggle against the non-traditional cults of Hindu theism,had denied the reality of the gods as more than mere names in the Vedic texts.It is the Vedas which are eternal, and thus play a part like the eternity ofmatter in the classic Greek cosmologies. Kumarila, in the generation beforeShankara, sharpened the argument to deny that a transcendent God wouldhave a motive for creating the world (a point also argued by Greek Skepticscited by Augustine). Shankara turned Mimamsa epistemology to a differentpurpose, in effect splitting the difference between Buddhist atheism and popularHindu realist polytheism. Since doubt presupposes a standard by which tojudge, the existence of the highest standpoint is proven; this is Brahman, theinexpressible non-dual reality, in contrast to which the world is illusory.Once Advaita had taken control of the attention space from Buddhism, allthe remaining Hindu schools were forced to readjust. Nyaya-Vaisheshika, theonly one to remain active outside the Advaita ranks, abandoned its earlyatheism and expanded its pluralist realism to include God as another metaphysicalentity in its list. Udayana (1000s c.e.) produced a compendium ofproofs; one variant of these (that right knowledge requires an external source,which can only be God) is reminiscent of Shankara’s epistemological proof,although without the acuteness of Shankara’s argument from doubt and beggingthe question as to whether right knowledge does in fact exist. Udayana’sother arguments include versions of the cosmological argument from causaldependence (Radhakrishnan and Moore, 1957: 379–385). The compendiumform implies that these arguments were current in previous generations of theNyaya-Vaisheshika school. Udayana ostensibly argues against Buddhism; butBuddhist atheism was no longer a living school, and the only Buddhist survivorsat that date were magical-theistic tantrists. What we see instead is a parallelto medieval Christianity, where proofs of God become a game in its ownright for the display of intellectual skills.Between 1000 and 1400, as theist schools (Ramanuja, Madhva, Nimbarka)836 • Meta-reflectionschallenged Advaita on philosophical turf, arguments focused not on the existenceof a creator-God, but on the degree of reality of the world, and on howthe undifferentiated Absolute could give rise to this lower realm. It was in thiscontext of dispute that the Advaita dialecticians Shri Harsha and Chitsukhasubjected every concept to analysis which dissolved it in the unreality ofcontradictions, leaving the non-dualist Absolute as the sole reality. The epistemology-metaphysics sequence was propelled to considerable heights as monotheismgrew in medieval India. The angle of approach is different than inthe Islamic and Christian West, where the reality of the world is the startingpoint from which proofs of God are mounted. In India, because the dominantschool in the post-Buddhist period is an impersonal transcendent mysticism,proofs of the world become the crucial question. In either case, thetension for philosophical argument is generated by the strength of anthropomorphicmonotheism.Deep Troubles: Free Will and Determinism, Substance and Plurality. A deeptrouble is a doctrine containing a self-propagating difficulty. Alternative pathsopen out, each of which contains further puzzles. Exploration of such conundrumsbecomes a chief dynamic on the medium to higher reaches of thephilosophical abstraction-reflexivity sequence. Intellectual life gets its energyfrom oppositions. It thrives on deep troubles because these provide guaranteedtopics for debate. Once a deep trouble is discovered, it tends to be recycledthrough successive levels of abstraction. The recognition of deep troublesenables us to reformulate with greater precision a basic principle of intellectualcreativity: oppositions divide the attention space under the law of small numbers,not merely along the lines of greatest importance to the participants, butalong the lines of the available deep troubles.21Monotheism is fruitful for advance along the abstraction-reflexivity sequencebecause it is a major source of deep troubles. One of the simplest ofthese is the issue of free will. The question of free will arises only at a level ofabstraction capable of generating contradictions within a pair of opposingconcepts. On one side there must be the generalized notion of omni-causality,on the other side an equally abstract and general notion of moral principle.Anthropomorphic monotheism is virtually defined by the combination of thesetwo abstractions: God’s unity and power is exalted to the extreme; at the sametime, the apotheosis of human virtues makes God into the essence of righteousnessand justice. The issue does not arise in polytheism, nor in transcendentmysticism, nor under an immanent cosmic world principle. That is why theissue of free will is an important one for Islam and Christianity (and in thesecular philosophy that follows after it), but not in Chinese, Indian, or Greekphilosophy.A version of the free will deep trouble does arise in the non-monotheistSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 837sequences. In China, India, and Greece alike, fairly early in the abstractionreflexivitysequence there arose the question of fate or destiny. This was a majorobjection for the early Mohists against the early Confucian cult of Heaven orDestiny. It crystallized among the Buddha’s contemporaries in the concept ofkarma, which the Ajivikas called an inescapable Fate, and which the Buddhaand the Jaina founder, Mahavira, proposed to overcome by meditative detachmentand by asceticism, respectively. In Greece, soon after the conception oflogical necessity was formed, the Megarian logician Diodorus Cronus, andafter him the Stoic school, argued that every statement about the future is eithertrue or false, and hence everything that will happen is already logically determined.Debaters countered that this would leave the world to fate, and underminethe motivation of the individual to do anything at all; to which the StoicChrysippus made the rejoinder that the actions of the individual are alsodetermined.As soon as the generalized notion of causality was formed, it became anobject of debate because it promoted the formulation of an equally abstractconcept of morality. Thus the oppositional path taken by the Mohists drovein the direction of monotheism, which can be regarded as the projection of ageneralized human morality onto the supernatural plane of a God personality.In India several philosophers who denied karma were attacked for denyingmorality by the Buddha, who thereby promoted a moral standard not previouslyheard in this intellectual community.These debates were fairly quickly resolved, as a philosophical conceptionof morality was created which eliminated the tension with omni-causality: inChina, human moral action was identified with either ritual and social tradition,or harmony with the cosmic tao; in India, causality was identified withthe world-order of illusion, which the highest morality lies in transcending; inGreece (leaving aside the polytheist position which had no moral or cosmictension), the predominant philosophical ethics were based on skeptical withdrawalfrom all judgments, cosmic and moral alike, or on Stoic harmonizationof self with an immanent world principle governing the universe. For theGreeks, the moral argument for free will was never strong, and the issuefocused on the more generalized question of determinism versus indeterminism.Plato and Aristotle influentially identified freedom with acting in harmony withreason (which was identified with cosmic order) and unfreedom with being inthrall to the passions.In all these cases, the tension dissipated as the abstraction-reflexivity sequencehit its middle ranges. Under monotheism the tension increased; in factit became the driving force for development of higher abstraction in what beganas positions that had no use for intellectual abstraction, and developed majorfactions explicitly hostile to it as their indigenous philosophies appeared.838 • Meta-reflectionsFree will is only a semi-deep trouble; it arises from tensions which derivefrom accepting a particular theology. Over a period of generations, explorationof free will uncovers more generic deep troubles built into concepts themselves.This is the problem of relations among unlike substances, or more generallythe problem of ontological plurality; this leads to the issues of causality andoccasionalism. At a still higher level of metaphysical acuteness, the deep troublebecomes reformulated as one of being and contingency. We see this drivingforce clearly in the case of Islamic philosophy.The first important issue around which intellectual networks formed in theearly 700s was a dispute over reconciling the omnipotence of God withresponsibility for moral evil. The faction of rational theology (kalam) elaborateda conception of God as having a rational nature, and therefore adheringto an ultimate standard of good; evil was thereby attributed to human freewill. The opposition of scriptural literalists who arose in response took thestance that free will is a limitation on the power of God, and concluded forpredestination. These same circles of argument launched proofs of the unityand power of God as omnipotent world creator, sharpening anthropomorphicmonotheism to where the deep trouble came out in full bloom. On this problemspace emerged the first set of famous Islamic intellectuals.The MuÀtazilite faction which emerged in the third and fourth generationsof kalam moved onto metaphysical grounds in order to defend simultaneouslyfree will and the proofs of God’s unity and power. The result of this combinationwas the occasionalist doctrine of divine intervention in a world composedof time-atoms. The free will argument led to a refined theory of causality, themodes by which God intervenes in the world; while the proofs of God’s unityled to breaking apart the concepts of substance and its attributes. Dirar rejectedbodily substance; the body is only a collection of attributes, with some attributesbuilt on others (e.g., being round is built on having a shape, and so on).There is no distinction of substance and attribute, since every substance isinfinitely divisible (a line of argument reminiscent of Buddhist nominalism).Dirar’s rival MuÀammar took a stance somewhat like Buddhist Abhidharmarealism: attributes are only the aggregation of underlying bodily atoms; but inkeeping with Islamic monotheism, MuÀammar held that God creates humanbodies by creating the atoms of which they are composed. This allowed adefense of free will and of God’s justice, since God is only indirectly responsiblefor the attributes of human bodies, and is not responsible for their good orevil qualities. Abu-l-Hudhayl went on to distinguish which kinds of attributesexist only momentarily in time, and which ones are relatively permanent;among the latter must be will and motion, life and knowledge, which arenecessary if there is to be a responsible human entity existing across time. TheseMuslims did not wish to dissolve the person into a fleeting aggregate, in effectSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 839an illusion, since they were aiming not at a Buddhist nirvana, but at anthropomorphicmoral salvation.The next round pushed further into the ontological status of existence andchange. Bishr took the realist side. Everything exists only as a series of atomicinstants in time, which God overseeing the world repeatedly creates anddestroys. But every existent is real during the time when it is there. Furthermore,Bishr—probably goaded by debates, similar to those in which theBuddhists pressed their Vaisheshika opponents onto increasingly extreme realistterritory—held that destruction too is a real action, and even the “nothing”out of which God creates time-atoms is a real “something” too. Against thisextreme realism, true to the pattern of intellectual polarization, al-Nazzamdeveloped a Heraclitus-like extreme processualism. Substance does not exist,since it can be infinitely subdivided. Attributes too dissolve, since all otherattributes reduce to motion, and motion is inherently transitory. Al-Nazzam’sopponents replied by raising Eleatic-like difficulties: Since any distance is madeup of an infinity of points, how is it possible for infinitely divisible time-atomsto traverse them?Dirar and MuÀammar, Abu-l-Hudhayl, Bishr and al-Nazzam are not famousnames; the debates within Islamic rational theology have never had a majorplace within the historical consciousness of philosophers, even in the Islamicworld, where either Greek-oriented falasifa (al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, et al.) or themore conservative orthodoxy of a later period reaped the long-term attention.Nevertheless, the early MuÀtazilites show the metaphysical driving power ofmonotheism and its capabilities for generating from its own resources (thiswas a period before Greek philosophy had penetrated the Islamic world, andthere is no serious reason to slough off these debates as imports of Buddhistor Christian ideas) some key positions in the medium ranges of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence, colored by a distinctively monotheist problematic.The occasionalism first formulated by the MuÀtazilites, and continued bythe theologically more conservative AshÀarites, is a religiously specific versionof the deep trouble in the concept of substance and plurality. For the Muslims,it was a question of invoking God to ensure the continuity from one instantto the next among a plurality of time-atoms. Radical plurality calls for anequally radical higher presence to explain the experience of continuity. Theproblem arises more generally in world philosophy, in the issue of relationsamong plural substances, or in the related issue of relationships among anykinds of ontological differences. In the Western tradition, this is the classicproblem of Parmenides: the very concept of being contradicts any sort ofchange or plurality. Being, the truly existing substance, is always itself; howcan it become any other thing without contradicting its nature? Simultaneouswith Parmenides, Heraclitus formulated the other side of the issue: change840 • Meta-reflectionsimplies that there is no substance, no river into which one can step twice.Parmenides’ follower Zeno of Elea turned the infinite divisibility of motioninto a set of paradoxical arguments against the reality of change; the samekind of arguments came up among the MuÀtazilites when the divisibility andreality of substance were debated. Both networks were working the same deeptrouble space.In Greece, the generations immediately after Parmenides responded withan array of solutions: one was Democritus’ atomism, in which the atoms weretaken as Parmenidean ultimates, incapable of modification, with plurality andchange shunted to a level of the aggregations of atoms. Other solutions werePlatonic forms, upgrading the qualities of ontological permanence to the levelof abstraction and downgrading the experienced world to non-reality; anotherwas Aristotle’s distinction of potentiality and actuality. As we know from thelong run of intellectual history, none of these solutions was in principle imperviousto new assaults of deep trouble: Can the Democritean atoms trulyaggregate without giving rise to the problems of plurality and relation? Canthe plurality of Platonic Forms be reconciled with the premise that true realityexists only in unity, the Form of all Forms? In Greece, the deep troubles werenot probed much further; halfhearted solutions held sway for many centurieswithout bringing additional changes in metaphysical conceptions.22 The mostacute standards were those held up by the Skeptics; but since their stance wasto cast doubt on all positions and to abstain from any positive constructions,they too became part of the fixity of positions in Hellenistic philosophy. Oneconclusion is that the absence of monotheism kept Greek philosophy fromprobing these troubles more deeply, and thereby advancing further in theabstraction-reflexivity sequence.23In India, the deep trouble of substance-relation, or of plurality in general,was much more central. This shows us that the issue does arise independentlyof monotheism; monotheism only gives it a specific form. The issue of satkaryavadaand asatkaryavada, arising in Buddhist critiques of Samkhya dualism,focuses on the same deep trouble in both its major forms. How can animmutable material substance suddenly launch itself in motion to emanate theuniverse? And how can it be related to a totally unlike substance of pureconsciousness, which does nothing but witness unperturbed what transpireson the material plane? The Indian solution was to distinguish the concept ofpotentiality from ontological actuality. In this case, the Aristotelean move wascountered by a further series of deep troubles: Is potentiality itself real? If not,are we not back at the same dilemma? If, however, potentiality is real, how isthis additional substance related to the substance in which it inheres?Indian philosophers pushed fairly early through the further levels of thisdeep trouble. The Buddhists, whose initial stance in the field was to destroySequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 841the reality of the self and of other aggregates, moved onward to the destructionof all substances and all reals. Nagarjuna attacked the intelligibility of anykinds of relations in general; taking as the mark of reality the capacity ofcausing something, he argued that the endless link of causes makes everythingunreal; causality dissolves substance. The argument was wielded not only bymedieval Buddhists such as Dignaga and Dharmakirti, dissolving substancesinto a web of conceptual negations, but also on the Hindu side. Shankarageneralized the critique from causality into a critique of any relations whatsoever:any cause-and-effect relation implies that the relation must be linked ateach end to the cause and to the effect, and that in turn implies another relationbetween the relation and the relata, and so on infinitely. Shri Harsha and theother Advaita dialecticians employed similar arguments against the reality ofany concepts. Among the earlier Indian thinkers, the deep trouble was exploitedmainly from the Buddhist side, that is to say, by a militantly atheisticmysticism.24 The growth of philosophical theism on the Hindu side was stimulatedby antagonism to Buddhism. The point at which the higher levels of thesubstance-relation deep trouble are brought out, with Shankara and his Advaitafollowers, is the point when theism begins to acquire a presence on thephilosophical field itself. Shankara’s Brahman was not very anthropomorphic,but it opened the gates to philosophical respectability for more explicitly theistphilosophies. Accordingly, it is in the debates of later Hindu philosophy betweenAdvaita and the variants of theist metaphysical pluralism that Indianintellectual life produces the most parallels to European themes.Occasionalism is the version which the substance-relation deep troubletakes when religious dogma presents philosophy with an anthropomorphicGod transcending both material and spiritual worlds. Occasionalism does notarise when there is a graduated hierarchy of matter and spirit (as in Neoplatonism),or where spirit is regarded as form immanent within matter. Islamicoccasionalism invokes God to connect the temporal splinters of the materialworld together; Christian occasionalism invokes God as a bridge between thematerial and spiritual substances, now taken as coeval in their reality. A similarcomplex of philosophical side-issues was discussed in the periods when occasionalismwas most central. For the Muslims, invoking God as a bridge waspart of a stance that no natural causality occurs among the atomic instants ofthe world. Causality and contingency came increasingly to the fore as issuesat the apex of Islamic philosophy between al-AshÀari and al-Ghazali. Al-Baqillani,in the AshÀarite school of the late 900s, held that there are no naturallaws; each atomic instant is uniquely created by God, under no necessity ofrepetition. From this lineage three generations later, al-Ghazali produced hisfamous Hume-like refutation of causality.In Europe, the four generations leading up to Hume were energized by842 • Meta-reflectionsworking through a similar family of deep troubles. The similarity in the contextis that here too a rationalized monotheism was confronted with a conceptionof an independently existing—that is, created, not emanated—material world.25In Islam, the naturalism was already present in the commonsensical religioustexts of anthropomorphic monotheism, while the rationalism grew with philosophicaldebate. In Europe, philosophical rationalism was long-standing fromthe first textual imports onward, while naturalist materialism came to the forewith the overthrow of Neoplatonism and Aristoteleanism around 1600. Descartesnow brought out the two-substance problem in full force. Debate, whichalways takes off from a successful new focus of the attention space, flamed upover fruitful inconsistencies in Descartes’s position. The result was an array ofsolutions: Malebranche and Geulincx formulated an occasionalism of time-instantsconstantly re-created by God; Spinoza avoided two-substance dilemmasby positing a single substance with mental and material aspects; Leibniz formulateda plurality of self-enclosed monads linked by a pre-established harmony.Concentrated in this generation are parallels to positions laid out inBuddhist, Hindu, and Islamic philosophy at points where the same deep troublewas confronted.The same circle of problems in Islamic and European networks results inthe distinction between primary and secondary qualities. Locke reconciles theplurality of substances by translating them into ideas originating in the senses.Instead of material substance there are simple ideas containing the relations ofextension and motion. From these in turn the mind generates the secondaryqualities characterizing the visible world. The AshÀarites had come to a similarconclusion: primary attributes of motion, rest, and location always accompanysubstance, while other attributes are derivative of these. The AshÀarites arrivedat this conception through the theological debates of the MuÀtazilites, fromwhom they had split. Locke’s primary-secondary distinction is often interpretedas an early formulation of the scientific standpoint, in which physics generatesthe subjective qualities of human experience. The Islamic comparison showsus something deeper: much the same distinction can be produced by theologicalissues; and in fact the same range of theological-philosophical deep troubleswere the context in which Locke’s formulation emerged as well.Locke’s solution was unstable, which is to say, the deep troubles it containedwere taken up again in the following generation. Berkeley (along withseveral figures overshadowed by him, Collier and Norris) stressed that thereis no direct evidence of any substance at all underlying the visible qualities ofexperience, nor of bare primary qualities shorn of secondary qualities such ascolor. The order of the world can be attributed instead to the constant interventionof God. This is a version of the occasionalist position, except thatinstead of intervening to establish the connection between physical and mentalSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 843events or substances, God intervenes to connect the succession of subjectivelyexperienced qualities. This position is equivalent to that of al-Nazzam in theMuÀtazilite debates. (We might notice that Berkeley and al-Nazzam both failedto acquire followers for their positions; both were regarded as taking debatesto an absurd extreme—in effect, testing the limits of what can be said abouta deep trouble in this particular direction).Still further down this road, Hume followed out the implications of Lockeand Berkeley to note that from a purely empirical stance, there is no evidenceof necessary causes or patterns of regularity in the phenomenal stream. Humeculminated this series of debates much in the same way that al-Ghazali did forthis period of the Islamic sequence.The problem of substance and plurality resurfaces in later revivals ofmetaphysics in European philosophy. One prong was to raise the issue at ahigher level of abstraction, in the very general question of relations. Bradley’sversion of Idealism was based on showing the incoherence of any kind ofrelation; using the same kind of argument as Shankara and Nagarjuna, Bradleypointed to an infinite regress of relations connecting relations with their relata.This problem stimulated yet a further step in the abstraction-reflexivity sequencewhen Russell distinguished external and internal relations. To hold thatall relations are internal (as did Bradley, Leibniz, and Spinoza) is to hold that athing’s properties are so closely connected that to change one would make ita different thing (we recognize here an explicit point from Nyaya-Vaisheshika,upholding asatkaryavada). To hold that relations are external is to say that theessential properties of a thing are intrinsic to it, and would remain the sameno matter how its relations with the rest of the world might change. The latterposition allows for plurality but makes mysterious just what constitutes theproperties of the plural things of the world; the former position reduces theworld into a single substance, something like Indra’s net in Hua-yen Buddhism.Russell’s distinction aimed to overthrow Bradleyan Idealism by showing thatit rested upon a confusion; but the clarification reopened the problem in newform, into the depths of which Wittgenstein’s Tractatus soon plunged.The other prong of this issue in modern philosophy followed the line thatthe deep trouble is built into the structure of reality itself. That is to say, realityis both plural and single, relations are both coherent and incoherent; it is thiscontradiction within metaphysical substance that generates time and driveschange. This was the position worked out by Fichte and Hegel. It is the classicdeep trouble treated at a higher level of reflexivity; the sequence of philosopherscomes to recognize explicitly the existence of the deep trouble, and instead oftrying to solve it by taking one side or the other, makes an ontological categoryout of it on which further constructions can be built. The period of thesedialectical Idealist systems was succeeded in turn by anti-Idealist philosophies.844 • Meta-reflectionsBut the basic deep trouble remained, to be re-exploited whenever the motivationarose to construct a new metaphysical system. The existentialists, for alltheir hostility to Idealism, reworked the dialectics of Fichte and Hegel in aversion which denies the priority of substance and gives primacy to negationas the paramount human reality. The anti-essentialism of the postmodernistgeneration continues to work that terrain in another fashion. No doubt futurephilosophies will be created upon this long-standing deep trouble.Mathematical Networks and the Distinctiveness of European PhilosophyLet us summarize where we are so far. If external conditions keep up creativityin intellectual networks for many generations, the content is driven beyondcosmological descriptions of the world to reflexive questions about the natureof knowledge itself. Epistemology entwines with metaphysics proper, openingfor exploration the realm of abstract properties of what there is. This epistemology-metaphysics sequence is propelled by several different social processes,of which I single out the following.First, the sheer density and continuity of debate raises the issue of whatknowledge is, initially on the level of bald assertion, then description. Formulatingrules of debate leads to the rules of logic as the mechanics of truth. Asusual, there is danger that a side-sequence will set in, making classificatoryscholasticism an end in itself. But if conditions exist to keep the abstractionreflexivitysequence going even across this classificatory tendency, logic willentwine with ontology and become part of the abstract framework of whatexists in general.At times the density of debating factions floods the attention space withcontending positions; this excess of horizontal density is fateful for the abstraction-reflexivity sequence too, because it generates epistemological skepticism.This faction takes the meta-stance of “a plague on all houses,” denying onreflexive grounds the very possibility of knowledge. This in turn provides afoil for a cogito move, providing new transcendental grounding for epistemological-metaphysical systems. This “horizontal” crowding of the network’scollective conscience has a counterpart in the “vertical” crowding which takesplace if continuing factional wars are kept up across the generations. Suchlong-term debates drive up the abstraction-reflexivity sequence by raising thelevel of reflexivity concerning the categories of argument: names, universals,particulars, radical contingency.Debate is most fruitful when it discovers deep troubles. An especiallyintense journey to high-level abstraction leads through monotheism, becausethis is a primary source of deep troubles. From relatively superficial or particularisticdeep troubles about the Trinity or free will, the network reachesSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 845deeper troubles about plurality and substance, causality and relation. Monotheismis not the only way some of these questions can be reached, but it makesthem especially acute, and produces abstract philosophy even quite early in anetwork’s history, as in the case of early Islamic thinkers. A monotheisticargumentative community generates proofs of God, rising to acute levels aboutjust what is proved and not proved; the proof game becomes freed up as anintellectual terrain in its own right.The network dynamics just outlined have occurred throughout the literatecivilizations of the world, with some variations in emphasis: China did not gofar in the epistemology-metaphysics sequence and, after the Han dynasty,focused on a cosmology-ethics fusion on a moderate level of abstraction;Islam, Judaism, Christendom, and Europe reaped the strongest consequencesof the monotheist impetus, which is found also to some extent in later medievalIndian philosophy. Besides the cosmological and epistemology-metaphysicssequences, there is a third major pathway in world philosophy: mathematics.This has been most important in modern Europe, where the takeoff in modernmathematics coincided with that of modern philosophy. Its effects are mostvisible in the networks around Descartes, Leibniz, and Newton, and againwith Frege, Husserl, Carnap, and Gödel on the Continent, and the Britishlineage from Boole to Russell and Wittgenstein. If we add the anti-mathematicalside of these same networks (e.g., Berkeley, Heidegger, Moore, and the laterWittgenstein), creating their positions by opposition, we can say modernEuropean philosophy is driven by mathematics.Let us be careful to understand what this means. European philosophy isnot driven only by mathematics; it combines all of the major processes justoutlined. It has continued a series of high-density debates and is heir tomonotheism, going through the period of religious secularization at just thistime and thereby traversing again the territory of deep troubles in the Godconcept. In fact it went through this terrain twice: in the 1600s, at the end ofthe religious wars, and again in the 1800s with the spread of the Germanuniversity revolution which seized secular control of the bastion of religiouseducation, setting off the Idealist metaphysics which served as a halfway housefor philosophers on religious turf. The revolutions of modern mathematicswere superimposed upon all this. The social conditions for the other routes arepresent elsewhere; in medieval India and Islam there are many parallels toEuropean thought from Descartes to Bradley, because there were high-densitycommunities of debate which also traversed, if in different directions, theterrain between sheer religion of reason and anthropomorphic monotheism.Mathematics is the ingredient which makes European philosophy unique,driving it to especially high levels of abstraction and reflexivity.Is mathematics just a contingent external intrusion upon philosophy? Not846 • Meta-reflectionsso; nor should we regard it as a tendency of philosophy to become “scientific”in its maturity. Mathematics is not identical with science; and as we have seen,empirical-discovery science per se does not drive up the abstraction-reflexivitysequence but tends to hold it constant on a given level, at least for long periodsof time, so that “lateral” exploration can take place. Mathematics has anintimate effect on the structure of the intellectual community because it revealssome of the innermost qualities of that community to itself.A key social determinant of this influence is the connection between mathematicaland philosophical networks. Mathematics has existed in all worldcivilizations. It reached some fairly elaborate developments in China (especiallythe algebra of the Sung dynasty) and Japan (the calculus during the Tokugawa),with bits of development in India, more in medieval Islam, and of courseancient Greece. As we have seen, the network patterns have varied widely. InChina and India, mathematical and philosophical networks were totally separate,whereas there was considerable network overlap in all four Western cases.This is most notable in Greece and in modern Europe, where not only do thenetworks overlap in regard to minor figures, but also the stars or networkcenters in each are closely linked, and sometimes even coincide in the sameperson.In Greece, crucial developments in the content of philosophy and mathematicswere influenced by this connection. The Sophists, who catalyzed thejump to higher abstraction in philosophy, were also the circle that popularizedmathematical puzzles. The Pythagoreans began as cosmologists based on theprimitive conceptions of mathematics; out of their ranks emerged the specializedmathematicians, as well as the key deep troubles such as the incommensurabilityproblem of irrational numbers. It was through the combination ofthe networks and concepts of the Sophists and the Pythagoreans that Platocreated the philosophy of abstract Forms. Philosophy also played back intomathematics. Aristotle’s formalized logic became the basis for axiomatic systemswhich culminated in Euclid’s synthesis of geometry. In the Hellenisticperiod, technical mathematics tended to become separate; the philosophymathematicsoverlap continued, shifting into numerology, blending a classificatoryscholasticism with lay-oriented occultism and the cosmology of worldemanations. After the classic period, the mathematics-philosophy overlap nolonger contributed to the abstraction-reflexivity sequence; we might even saythat it was their overlap for a few generations which made the period “classic”in both fields.In modern Europe, the mathematical revolution of the 1500s produced botha new form of mathematics and an impetus to modern philosophy, involvingthe fusion for a while between the most creative mathematical and philosophicalnetworks. Why should the network fusion have this effect? The answerSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 847requires a sociology of mathematics. The history of mathematics is the purestcase of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence. The objects which mathematiciansinvestigate are intellectual operations. It took many generations of continuousintellectual competition before the community came to recognize this. At firstmathematics was regarded as a realm of objective objects—the Pythagoreans’number pebbles and the Platonic Forms. It took successive layers of self-reflectionfor the network to discover that it could create new operations, new modesof manipulating its symbolism, and investigate their consequences. Highermathematics consists in exploring this reflexivity of mathematical operations.Since thinking is internalized from communication within a social network,mathematics is the investigation of the pure, contentless properties of thoughtas internalized operations of communication per se. This will become clearerif we review the two great revolutions in modern mathematics.mathematicians discover the purereflexiveness of intellectual operationsThe takeoff of modern mathematics in the 1500s and early 1600s occurred byturning mathematics into a problem-solving machine. The verbal methods bywhich mathematical argument previously had been carried out were replacedby a pervasive symbolism, and even more important, by an apparatus formanipulating symbols according to rules. Mathematics became a technologyof symbols on paper, lined up in equations; the principles of how to movesymbols about so as to transform one into another mechanically became boththe means of solving particular problems and an arena in which reliablegeneralizations were discovered. Methods were found for solving lower-orderproblems (e.g., algebra gives general principles for classes of problems inarithmetic). These methods in turn could be taken as lower-order patternsabout which still higher-order principles can be discovered. That is to say, thelower-order operations can be collected under a symbol (numbers are symbolizedas algebraic unknowns x, y, and so on; adding, subtracting, and so forthcan be symbolized as a function; functions can be collected under functions offunctions), and the rules for operating with those higher-order symbols can inturn be explored. As earlier problems were solved, extensions were suggested(e.g., from rules for solving algebraic problems involving cubic equations, newchallenges were posed by competing mathematicians to solve quartic andquintic equations, and so on). Suddenly there was an outpouring of mathematicaldiscoveries. This intellectual network began to pulsate with energy asit explored a widening turf: the general features of algebraic equations andtrigonometry, which in turn cross-fertilized older areas of mathematics such asgeometry, giving increasing attention to the more difficult problems of solidfigures, and the conic sections which turned out to yield representations ofmotion and open the way to the calculus.848 • Meta-reflectionsDescartes was the network member who reaped the first great fame for thisrevolution. He set out the general methods for what henceforth became thestandard forms for setting up equations and symbolizing unknowns and therules for manipulating them. His algebraic geometry unified all the field ofmathematics into a single conceptual realm; it also brought to the center ofattention a meta-space on which points, lines, squares, and dimensions higherthan those of the physical universe could all be combined in a single processof mathematical manipulation. Descartes made the intellectual world aware ofa meta-level of abstraction, expounding not only his particular results but alsoa general theory of equations, and pointed to a higher dimension of mathematics.Most important, he trumpeted it abroad that the mathematical communitynow possessed a method for producing a stream of new and reliableresults, a machine for making discoveries.Exploring the turf opened up by this discovery-making machine made upthe first wave of modern mathematics. Around 1800 a second wave of mathematicalabstraction and discovery took off. This time it proceeded by heighteningreflexiveness about what mathematicians themselves were doing, a growingself-consciousness which led up to the realization that mathematics itselfis a study not of things but of its own operations. This wave of highermathematics was set off by an organizational shift, the emergence of academicpositions, networks, and publications in which mathematics could be pursuedindependently of the physical sciences and their applications. The machineryof mathematics began to be scrutinized in its own right, apart from the resultsit gave for generalizations about the world of nature. The practical methodsof the previous period, when the various territories of calculus were explored,now began to be criticized for their lack of rigor, for operations such asdiscarding terms and dividing by zero, and for assuming concepts such as serieswhich are never seen to converge.Rigor became a new standard for the competitive game, now played on itsown abstract turf. Conceptually sloppy methods could no longer be justifiedmerely because they brought good results in physics or engineering; at the sametime, new standards of proof were held up in the competitive challenges betweenone mathematician and another. This purposely involuted game turnedout to be a success; rather than being a needless refinement, rigor opened upa vast new realm of abstract mathematics to be explored. The discovery-makingmachinery took off again, this time on a higher plane. The method ofaxiomatization, carefully laying out the rules of operations, was applied notonly to geometry (where a set of restricted, physically commonsensical principleshad been standard since Euclid), but also to algebra, and then to still moreabstract realms such as the theory of groups.The march into this realm was made exciting by the recurrent experienceof discovering paradoxes: patterns which seemed absurd from the point of viewSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 849of previously accepted concepts of mathematical reality, strange mathematicalbeasts which outraged traditionalists. A self-generating cycle was set in motion:the conflicts over paradoxes energized stronger efforts to overcome them bymore careful re-digging of axiomatic foundations and by making clear theoperations of the mathematical machinery which produced them. Furtheraxiomatization and rigor made it possible to examine still other kinds ofaxiomatic sets, and to discover still more comprehensive layers of abstractspace, within which could be found still more of the paradoxical breed. Notonly spatial intuition but any acceptance of self-evident procedures or conceptscame under suspicion.Vast new realms of higher mathematics opened up. At the same time,conflict grew acute between the most enthusiastic explorers of those realms offree mathematical invention—such as Georg Cantor, with his multiple levelsof transfinite numbers—and opponents who declared that rigor must grounditself upon firmly intuited reality. Mathematics, the time-honored standard ofabsolute certainty and consensual agreement, now split into a foundationalconflict. At this point some mathematicians reached a meta-turf resembling abranch of philosophy, and a new hybrid of mathematical philosophy arose.mathematician-philosopher hybridsfrom descartes to russellThe key points of modern philosophy come when the mathematical networkspills over into philosophical terrain. This happens naturally because any topicspursued at a sufficiently high level of abstraction and reflexivity leave thespecific problems of the original practitioners and encounter philosophical turf.In his own interests and intentions, Descartes was a mathematician and (whatwe would call) natural scientist. He was a key figure in proclaiming andconsolidating the takeoff of the mathematical revolution, synthesizing thenotational tools developed by his predecessors, and turning them into anexplicit machinery for the manipulation of equations. His famous analyticalgeometry, published in conjunction with his Discourse on Method, displayshow even the most traditional parts of mathematics can be pushed forwardwith this new machinery. In his larger philosophical statements, Descartesextends to the entire realm of knowledge the confidence of the scientific andmathematical revolutions, the feeling that rapid discovery and certainty arelinked through the use of the new methodological machinery. Mathematics washis inspiration and standard for attempting the comprehensive deduction ofall certain knowledge; his goal was to deduce all scientific principles from theproperties of extended substance or matter, which now replaced the Neoplatonistand Aristotelean cosmologies.The philosophical attention space was rejuvenated by the preliminary parts850 • Meta-reflectionsof Descartes’s system; issues of the cogito and of the relations among dualsubstances became the deep troubles on which specifically philosophical creativitytook off. A second key intrusion from mathematics came when Leibniz,the most aggressive developer and purveyor of the calculus, used his commandof the new mathematical sophistication—now a quantum leap higher than inDescartes’s generation—to solve these metaphysical problems. Leibniz’s approachto the two-substance conundrum was to reinstate a scholastic doctrine:that essence contains all its predicates. His calculus provides a respectablyup-to-date analogy: each substance contains its past and future states, just likea point moving along mathematical coordinates; since in geometrical representationa moving point looks like a point at rest, the point must contain anadditional mathematical quality (later called “kinetic energy”) which generatesthe motion from past to future. The infinitesimal calculus had opened the wayto conceiving of second-order (and higher) relations among first-order relations.Leibniz used this to solve an issue which had arisen over both Descartes’sextended substance and the rival materialist doctrine of atomism, namely, thatall material substance is infinitely divisible, and thus ultimately fades away intonothing. From the point of view inspired by Leibniz’s calculus, there is atranscendent order which arises from examining the pattern of infinite subdivision,which shows how infinitesimals nevertheless make up a solid continuum.Leibniz’s monadology combines an infinite array of independent substances,each of whose essence logically contains all its predicates or qualities,including its causal and time-space relations. It is a mathematician’s vision ofthe universe.26The next big leap in metaphysics and epistemology comes with Kant. Heis not a star mathematician on the level with Descartes and Leibniz, but hetaught mathematics and science early in his career, and his first interests—andhis most prominent network contacts—were in science and mathematics. Healso inherited Leibniz’s position within philosophy, as part of the Wolffianschool which dominated the Prussian universities; Kant’s creativity was theresponse of that network as it met the challenges posed both on the religiousside and by the Newtonians, who constituted a counter-wave to the Descartes-Leibniz lineage throughout this period. Again with Kant, consideration of theabstract properties of mathematics was the key to his philosophy. His keydiscovery was the concept of the synthetic a priori. Up to this time theconventional view was that mathematics epitomizes analytical knowledge, theinvestigation of the implications of definitions and axioms. But such knowledgeis merely tautological; Kant wanted a version of knowledge which is synthetic,non-tautological, amplifying what we know rather than merely clarifying whatwe already knew.Kant took his crucial step by arguing that mathematics is in fact not ana-Sequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 851lytical but synthetic, while remaining a priori. It follows that there does exista form of knowledge which is both certain and informative, going beyond mereknowledge of concepts. Kant went on to investigate what are the categories ofsynthetic a priori understanding, concluding that time, space, and causality arecategories through which all experience is necessarily filtered, and in whosenecessary regularities all valid scientific knowledge can be formulated. Kant’stranscendental method opened up a whole new playing field—in fact two suchfields—for philosophers, quite apart from whatever science can be groundedin this way. One is the path into Idealism, constructing all of reality from theworking out of consciousness. The other path, which has proven to be moreenduring, is the critical aspect of Kant’s transcendental method. It is a methodof working backwards, investigating in any field of experience what is necessarilypresupposed for that experience to be formulated.This method makes critical epistemology into the central philosophicalquestion. At the same time—a point that was to provide grounds for a hugeneo-Kantian movement in the burgeoning university system—it makes thephilosopher the arbiter of the knowledge conditions of every other intellectualdiscipline. In Kant’s own generation this method spread like wildfire becauseit proclaimed the autonomy of philosophical intellectuals over theology, indeedgiving philosophy the position of pronouncing on the conditions for knowledgeclaims in theology as in every other field. This Kantian critical epistemologywas the ideology of the university revolution. And since the researchuniversity has been the key organizational base for intellectuals ever since, weare all post-Kantians, ever since anchored around the centrality of criticalepistemology.27These movements from Descartes to Kant were parts of one wave, spillingover from the first round of the mathematical revolution. The second wave ofhigher or reflexive, self-consciously abstract mathematics was the catalyst forthe philosophies of the turn of the 1900s. It started off with persons whopursued (at least initially) mathematical careers—Frege, Husserl, Russell—andramified into the movements not only of logical positivism, the Vienna Circle,and analytical philosophy generally, but also into phenomenology and existentialism.The mathematical movement toward rigor, reflexivity, and the deliberatecreation of higher-order formal systems stimulated philosophy in severalways. Reflexivity and higher-order abstraction became topics for discussion intheir own right, leading to devices such as Russell’s theory of types andHusserl’s layers of phenomenological reduction or epochê. Higher mathematicsencourages the formulation of new languages, which Frege pioneered in logic,and his followers attempted for all the verbal realms. And it turned up its owndeep troubles, in the debate over the foundations of mathematics which generalizedto philosophical turf and energized the action at Cambridge, Göttingen,and Vienna.852 • Meta-reflectionsThe history of higher mathematics is a piling on of levels of abstraction asthe search for greater generalization goes on. In effect, arithmetic was createdas a generalization of the principles of counting, summarizing in rules whatthe result would be of various kinds of operations (adding things together,removing some, partitioning, recombining). Algebra gives higher-order generalizationsabout whole classes of operations that might be carried out inarithmetic (thus it is always possible to check an algebraic equation with aspecific numerical example). The takeoff of modern mathematics around thetime of Tartaglia and Cardano was in formulating higher-order principles asto how to solve whole classes of equations; these in turn gave rise to still furtherquestions as to whether general solutions were possible in various areas (e.g.,the famous question of the general solution of the quintic equation, a flashpointfor abstract mathematics in the 1820s). The revolution of higher mathematicswas the formulation of still higher levels of abstraction for dealing with thesemeta-issues, such as the theory of groups. This turned revolutionary as itdawned on mathematicians that they were in the business of exploring successivelevels of abstraction, and that they could create abstract systems at willin order to solve their problems, or indeed just for the free creativity ofexploring these realms. The non-Euclidean geometries took off when it wasrecognized that there was no longer any need to connect them with plausiblephysical representations; at the same time, alternative algebras were inventedby deliberately varying the axiomatic sets of operations which underlie conventionalalgebra.The increasing reflexivity that went along with this movement had a doubledirection: piling on still higher levels of abstraction, and also delving backwardsinto the concepts which were used in a taken-for-granted, non-reflexivemanner earlier in the history of mathematics. Higher algebra was created whenit was realized that the set of axioms underlying elementary algebra were onlyone of the possible abstract combinations possible. Plunging still further back,one arrives at arithmetic, and then at the concept of number itself. Here theconservative mathematics drew the line, Kronecker declaring, “God made theintegers, man created all the rest!” and blasting the more extreme forms ofrevolutionary mathematicians for its monstrosities and paradoxes. Nevertheless,this terrain too was aggressively opened up, by Cantor and Frege. Extraplatingthe path of previous revolutionary reconstructions, Frege recognizedthat numbers are not primitive things, but emerge in systems of operations,and indeed there are multiple dimensions of these operations. In the same waythat Cantor distinguished several orders of infinity by several methods ofcounting, Frege distinguished cardinal and ordinal properties of numbers.More generally, by examining the operations that are implied in using the equalsign () in an equation, he uncovered multiple dimensions in our taken-forgrantedconcept of equality; with greater generality this became the distinctionSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 853between sense and reference. In this spirit Frege undertook a reform in theentire system of notation and operations which made up traditional logic,replacing the taken-for-granted concepts of subjects and predicates, modeledon language, with a formal system which makes explicit the multiple dimensionsof operations brought out in the mathematics of numbers. It was thismachinery which Russell saw could be as revolutionary in the realm of philosophyas was the machinery of equations with which Descartes had promotedthe takeoff of modern mathematics.Once again, the straightforward path toward solving all problems with anew tool became displaced into a fanning-out of creativity at the newly exposedground level. What made the Frege-Russell movement philosophically fruitfulwas not so much its avowed intention, the technical exercise of translatingphilosophical problems into the new formalism and thereby clearing awayconfusion forever, as that it uncovered deep troubles. Russell became morefamous for his theory of types, his device for repairing a deep trouble, thanfor his logicist program itself. The real fame of the movement came withWittgenstein, who built a meta-system by wrestling with the general difficultiesin hierarchical programs such as the theory of types, and with the ViennaCircle, who promoted Russellian logicism as the revolution which was to sweepaway all the fallacies of philosophy. After the fireworks of the initial phases ofcombat, what settled out as the new philosophical turf was the exploration ofwhat kinds of things are sayable in various sorts of systems of notation orsymbolism. In a sense Wittgenstein amplified Kant’s discovery about the synthetica priori: what had previously been taken as merely arbitrary and tautologicalsymbols turned out to be a realm with its own contours, an unknownland to be explored, and in which discoveries might be made far beyond thetaken-for-granted of past history or “common” sense. This is much the sameas what higher mathematics does, in full reflexive consciousness; this is whywe can say that the mathematical abstraction-reflexivity sequence has beenthe instigator of the philosophical abstraction-reflexivity sequence in modernEurope.oppositions of higher reflexivity: formalism andanti-formalism to husserl and wittgensteinA large segment of modern European philosophers would have been surprisedto hear mathematics described as the driving force of modern philosophy.Nevertheless, the intellectual world is structured by oppositions; there is notmerely a non-mathematical philosophy in the modern attention space but awing of militantly anti-mathematical philosophers. The weapons of modernanti-mathematical philosophies have owed more to their enemies than theanchorage which enemies always provide for one another. The reflexivity of854 • Meta-reflectionshigher mathematics has been central to the various branches of anti-positivists;the postmodernism of the late 1900s loudly echoes the themes of the mathematicalfoundations crisis, for those who have ears to hear.28The drive of the mathematical networks into higher abstraction and reflexivityis what gives the distinct edge to the philosophy of the modern West.Of course, the abstraction-reflexivity sequence in general also drives up thelevel of reflexivity, but this has become hyper-accelerated in the West by thelong-term tendencies of two disciplinary networks. It is this which has producedthe latest round of self-consciousness about symbol systems that seemsto be cutting away the very ground beneath one’s feet.The intellectual situation since about 1700 in this respect is historicallyunique. An anti-mathematical stance of this sort would have been inconceivableto most Greek, Islamic, and medieval Christian philosophers,29 for whommathematics would have been not seen as a bringdown to mundane calculationbut as the essence of the transcendental, even mystical hierarchy. Mathematicswas the ally of religion and faith. It was only after the great reversal ofalliances, at the time of the secularization of the intellectual world in the late1600s, that an anti-science and anti-mathematical front appeared. Moreover,this front consisted not merely of religious reactionaries, but of a secularopposition to the main line of philosophical development.The break began as an opposition formed to the Cartesian-Hobbesianontology of extended substance. Newton, a hero for the scientific movement,was nevertheless anchored in the anti-Cartesian–anti-Hobbesian network, theCambridge Platonists; the quarrel between Newtonian action-at-a-distance(“occult qualities” to its enemies) and the Cartesian physics of solidly filledspace was the opening clash on the new battle lines. It was philosophers flowingfrom Newton’s network—Berkeley, Hume—who went on to do the mostdamage to the claims of mathematical science as a comprehensive philosophy.Henceforward every development in the mathematically driven sequence ofhigher abstraction and reflexivity had a counterpart on the anti-mathematicalside: Kantian transcendentalism promoted aesthetic Idealism as well as Hegel’sdenigration of mathematics as an outmoded and superficial consciousness onthe level of mere calculation. Mathematical and anti-mathematical inspirationbecame the deep troubles of philosophical creativity.The struggle for and against mathematical formalism became the chiefdividing line in philosophy after 1900. Husserl put forward phenomenologyas “rigorous science” in order to solve the crisis of modern thought, by whichinitially he meant the foundations crisis just then bursting into the open in theprogrammatic battles of formalists and intuitionists. The phenomenologicalmovement then migrated en masse to the other side of the field, as the laterHusserl himself, and his existentialist offshoots, came to see formalization asSequence and Branch in the Social Production of Ideas • 855the dead hand of technique. Against this we get the anti-technicism of Heidegger,and Sartre’s identification of existence with sheer logical unfoundedness.A similar oppositional dialectic took place within the logicist camp, the immediatenetwork offspring of Frege and Russell. Ordinary language philosophywas formulated in reaction to the search for a logically perfect language.Wittgenstein, a dominant figure in the attention space because of the way hebattened on deep troubles, managed by a series of switches to be a major playerin almost every camp.Has the mathematical impetus spent itself? Since mathematics is anotherversion of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence, albeit the one that strips abstractionand reflexivity down to purest essentials, one might well say that thetwo streams merge once again at the point where a self-conscious meta-mathematicsbecomes mathematically inspired philosophy. And since mathematicscontinues to have its distinctive turf—the lineage of operations deriving primitivelyfrom counting and measuring—the trajectory of meta-mathematics canbe seen as a balloon which has slipped its moorings and now is floating awayon the high level of generality which is the hereditary turf of philosophy.The Future of PhilosophyWill philosophy have a future? And why would it not? To say that philosophyis coming to an end is tantamount to saying that the abstraction-reflexivitysequence is coming to an end. It is to say that there are no more deep troublesto drive oppositions, no more law of small numbers dividing the attentionspace, no more rearrangements of the networks in reaction to shifts in theorganization bases of intellectual life.It is a partisan theme which announces that the era of foundational questionsis over, a move within the normal oppositions of struggle over intellectualattention space. The call for the end of philosophy is recurrent, a standard ployin intergenerational rearrangements, usually a prelude to a new round of deeptroubles and new creativity. The version popular in the 1980s and 1990s iscouched in the terms of heightened reflexivity of this era. It fails to takesociological reflexivity far enough to perceive the nature of philosophical turf.The search for permanent foundations is another recurrent ploy, the standardterminology of staking a claim on a certain region of the intellectual battleground.Neither side perceives that philosophy is the terrain of struggle, andthat deep troubles, not permanent solutions, are the treasures which are theimplicit focus of the struggles for possession of the attention space. Philosophyis the turf of intellectuals who perpetually re-dig their conceptual foundations.Foundations are their terrain, not because they are bedrock, but because theyare the ever-receding apex of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence—receding not856 • Meta-reflectionsupward to the heavens but downward and inward. This endless digging nomore dissolves philosophy into nothingness than Leibniz’s infinitesimal calculusmade an unreality out of the continuum.The same can be said for the diagnosis that philosophy becomes exhaustedas its contents eventually split free to become empirical sciences. This conceptionrests on dim awareness that there are branching paths of the abstractionreflexivitysequence, a polemical awareness that identifies philosophy with thecosmological sequence alone. This misperceives the character of the philosophicalattention space, and fails to see that sciences find their niche at a lowerlevel of abstraction. The social practices of modern rapid-discovery naturalscience are not those of intellectual networks in philosophy, and their nichesin attention space to do not supplant one another. The end of philosophy wasproclaimed yet again when the modern social sciences split off from philosophicalnetworks. As we have seen, there have been substantive repercussionsof both these breaks within the contents of modern philosophy. It would bethe wrong inference to see in this anything more than the energizing flows thathappen in intellectual networks when their surrounding material bases arechanged, opening up the factional space for creative realignments.Most recently, the organizational revolution of the modern university madeit possible to expand the number of specialized disciplines, and each newalignment provides new topics for argument on the most abstract intellectualspace. Philosophy is more than the womb of disciplines, and there is no dangerof its emptying out to find nothing left of its own. On the contrary, the splittingoff of specific empirical disciplines has laid bare the core topics and deeptroubles of the abstraction-reflexivity sequence.As long as there are intellectual networks capable of autonomous action todivide their own attention space, there will be philosophy. If we but knew thesocial structure of the intellectual world from now until the end of human-likeconsciousness in the universe, we could chart as long a sequence of futuregenerations of philosophers.