CHAPTER 2£Networks across the GenerationsHigh levels of intellectual creativity are rare. Why this is so is the result ofstructural conditions, not individual ones. A famous rhetoric has it that philosophiesare lengthened shadows of great personalities. But psychologists’efforts to show conditions affecting creative personalities are underdetermined.Particular configurations, such as birth order among siblings, remoteness fromone’s father, a longing for love, bodily clumsiness (suggested by Sulloway, 1996;Scharfstein, 1980), surely occur much more frequently than major creativethinkers. Nor is it sufficient to have been born in an era of peace and supportfor intellectual activity, or to have experienced other low-level conditions forself-actualization (documented by Simonton, 1976; Kuo, 1986, 1988; Maslow,1970). The rarity of creativeness also shows the limits of any externalistexplanation by general conditions of the surrounding society; zeitgeist, politicalor material circumstances affect everyone, and such explanations cannot tellus why their creative agents are so few.The Rarity of Major CreativityLet us see how often notable philosophers appeared in China and in Greco-Roman antiquity. For the moment, let us take eminence as a matter of howmuch attention particular thinkers have received from later historians of philosophy.Figures 2.1 and 2.2 display segments of the networks which connectsuch philosophers with one another. (A modified version of Figure 2.1 appearsin Chapter 4 as Figure 4.2, and a fuller version of Figure 2.2 appears as Figure3.4 in Chapter 3.) The full sequence of networks for China from 535 b.c.e.to 1565 c.e. is shown in Figures 4.1 through 4.4 and 6.1 through 6.5; thesequence of Greek networks from 600 b.c.e. to 600 c.e. is in Figures 3.1, 3.2,and 3.4 through 3.8. Such networks will be the backbone of this book,interspersed throughout the following chapters. On these charts, the names ofmajor philosophers are given in capitals (e.g. mencius, chuang tzu, socrates,54FIGURE 2.1. NETWORK OF CHINESE PHILOSOPHERS, 400–200 B.C.E.Networks across the Generations • 55FIGURE 2.2. NETWORK OF GREEK PHILOSOPHERS FROMSOCRATES TO CHRYSIPPUS56 • The Skeleton of Theoryepicurus), and the names of secondary philosophers in initial capitals andlower case (Kao Tzu, Han Fei Tzu, Antisthenes, Speusippus). Minor thinkersare indicated by numbers, listed in the keys in Appendix 3.1Set aside for the moment issues of changing canonicity, and whether wecan distinguish between “reputation” and “creativity.” These do not affect thecentral point which must begin our analysis: creative philosophers occur infrequentlyin the total scheme of historical time, even by the most generouscriterion of creativity.Consider all those philosophers who can be regarded as “major,” as wellas those who can be considered “secondary.” Our Chinese sequence runs for2,100 years, or 63 generations; the Greek sequence covers 1,200 years, or 36generations.2 Across the whole expanse of time, major philosophers appearabout once a generation in Greece, once every two generations in China.Secondary philosophers are a little more frequent, but not much: in China thereis one per generation on the average, in Greece two per generation. Even minorthinkers do not appear in overwhelmingly large numbers, averaging six orseven individuals who are contemporary during any given lifetime:China2,100 years 63 generations25 major philosophers 0.4 per generation 1 per 84 years61 secondary philosophers 1.0 per generation 1 per 34 years356 minor 5.7 per generation 1 per 6 yearsGreece1,200 years 36 generations28 major philosophers 0.8 per generation 1 per 43 years68 secondary philosophers 1.9 per generation 1 per 18 years237 minor 6.6 per generation 1 per 5 yearsOne might be tempted to make something of the fact that philosophers ofthe higher degrees of importance are about twice as common in Greece as inChina. But this I think is not an important lesson. The higher ratio of Greekto Chinese philosophers at the more creative levels is due almost entirely tothe 7 generations between 500 and 265 b.c.e., beginning with Heraclitus andParmenides, and ending with Epicurus and Zeno the Stoic. This period includes14 major and 31 secondary philosophers. Yet even here the concentration isnot overwhelming: it averages 2 major philosophers and slightly fewer than 5secondary philosophers active in any given period of 33 years, a total corecommunity that could very easily form a small face-to-face group. Even if webring in the minor figures, the maximum is still no more than 15 or 20 at atime. And this is as high a concentration of philosophical action as anywherein world history.Networks across the Generations • 57The Chinese, too, had their hot spots. The 4 generations of the late WarringStates period from 365 to 235 b.c.e. contain 5 major and 9 secondary philosophers,including Mencius, Hui Shih, Chuang Tzu, Kung-sun Lung, TsouYen, and Hsün Tzu. These are the most influential and sophisticated of theancient philosophers. Moreover, this period contains two anonymous workswhose authors rank at the top of philosophical creativity: the Tao Te Ching,attributed anachronistically to the (probably) mythical Lao Tzu; and the MohistCanons, the high point of rationalist logic in all of Chinese history. Thesegive us high creative densities of 2.33 major and 2.67 secondary figures pergeneration. The other concentrated period of philosophical creativity is in theSung dynasty, especially the 3 generations of the Neo-Confucian movementfrom 1035 to 1165 c.e., and again from 1167 to 1200, which gives an averageof 2.33 major and 1.33 secondary figures per generation.3 The high-densityperiods of Chinese philosophy are about the same as those of Greece; theGreeks merely have more of them.4Who Will Be Remembered?We might regard the preceding exercise as based on nothing but subjectiveestimates of creative worth, arbitrarily imposing a historically situated standardthat shifts from one epoch to another. Such issues are not to be passedby lightly with a show of numbers, since every measurement rests on themeaning of what is measured. In framing the topic, issues of method are issuesof theory.Canons are historically situated; but let us grasp the full implications. Wecannot invoke as a foil a reservoir of “deserving” but unknown thinkers in theshadows throughout history, just as “creative” as the ones whose names weretrumpeted, as if there were some trans-historical realm in which their achievementis measured. Ideas are creative because they hold the interest of otherpeople. The very concept of creativity implies the judgment of one generationupon another. Shall we say that we are studying not creativity but reputation?The distinction arises from our tendency to heroize, to reify the individualapart from the context. Although it seems to violate our sense that causes oughtto be antecedent to what we are explaining, the “creativity” of a particularphilosopher is not established until several generations have passed, because itliterally is a matter of how sharp a focus that individual’s ideas become in thelong-term structure of the networks which transmit ideas.My sociological criterion for creativity is the distance across generationsthat ideas are transmitted. I have ranked philosophers in China and Greeceaccording to how many pages of discussion they receive in various histories ofphilosophy. My ratings are based on composites of ratings from all sources.558 • The Skeleton of TheoryThe reader is free to reassign the boundaries between the ranks and reanalyze;I doubt this would materially change our picture of the structural patterns inthe networks.The sources closest to the ancient philosophers were also attempting tomake historical judgments as to what ideas were influential, and what ideaswere worth remembering or combatting. Modern histories of Chinese philosophyrely ultimately on ancient sources such as the early historian Ssu-ma T’an(ca. 120 b.c.e.) and the criticism of schools in contemporary memory byMencius, Hsün Tzu, Han Fei Tzu, and the Chuang Tzu. The modern histories,like their predecessors, often quote entire passages from these ancient sources,building on the amount of attention that earlier philosophers received fromothers closer in time. We cannot jump outside of history. But this is not alimitation on what we can understand of intellectual creativity; it is the natureof the beast. Intellectual greatness is precisely one’s effect on the course ofintellectual history, influencing generations downstream from one’s own.In my rankings, greatness is based on the degree to which a philosopherremains of interest to other thinkers across long periods of time. Canons dochange, but only among those figures who have entered into the long-termchain of reputation in the first place. The first threshold is reputation thatcarries down beyond one or two generations. For this reason, the level ofstructural creativity is not easy to discern among one’s own contemporaries.Plato in his own lifetime was no better known—and perhaps less so—thanother offshoots of Socrates’ circle such as Aristippus, founder of the Cyrenaicschool, or Antisthenes, who pioneered the social iconoclasm that later becameCynicism. Aristotle made more of a stir in his own day; it is said that whenhe returned to Athens in triumph upon the victory of his patron Alexander theGreat, he wore a gold crown and rings and was carried in a throne-like chair.Yet Aristotle had to flee for his life when Alexander died in 323 (Grayeff, 1974:44–45). His philosophical doctrines, balanced carefully between materialismand the Platonic doctrine of Ideas, were propagated in pure form for only twogenerations, and for the next hundred years his school gave out under his namea much more materialist doctrine consisting largely of empirical science. Therewere more ups and downs to come. After the rediscovery of Aristotle’s originaltexts and their propagation during the rearrangement of all the philosophicalfactions around 80–50 b.c.e., Aristotle’s fame rose to moderate levels forsome 600 years; yet his doctrines typically circulated in a syncretistic formunder the dominance of Platonism. It was only in medieval Islam and Christendomthat Aristotle became the master in his own right, “The Philosopher”tout court, reaching the height of reputation in the generations from 1235 to1300 c.e. Again in the 1500s Aristotle’s reputation was touted by one factionof the Humanists, enhancing his reputation yet again because he became theNetworks across the Generations • 59chief foil for attacks launching the self-consciously “modern” period of Westernphilosophy.Socrates, by contrast, was heroized above all during the period when Cynicsand Skeptics were popular, 400–300 b.c.e., that is to say, in the generationsimmediately following his death. He was claimed by many schools. The Cynicstraced their lineage back to Socrates’ associate Antisthenes, whom they regardedas the master of Diogenes of Sinope. The Megarian school, founded bySocrates’ protégé Euclid6 (or Euclides), carried on the tradition of questioningand debate, and pioneered methods of logic. From Socrates flowed the shortlivedschools of Elis (founded by his pupil Phaedo) and of Cyrene (founded byAntisthenes); these too pursued Socrates’ omni-questioning technique, nowapplied to questions of the value of life itself. To a considerable extent Platopropagandized his own doctrines, which derived more from Pythagorean andother sources than from Socrates, by attaching them to a famous figure, andthereby riding into the center of attention on the popularity of rival schoolswhich at the time outshone his own. When Plato, in turn, rose to dominance(not as dialectics but as metaphysics, increasingly mixed with occultism) after100 c.e., Socrates’ fame dissipated; nor did it return among the Islamic ormedieval Christian philosophers. For us moderns, Socrates’ fame is largely anappendage of our interest in Plato.One can tell similar stories of East Asia. Confucius, whose fame anddoctrinal tradition built up over many generations, was not always treated asthe symbolic property of the Confucian school. He appears as a rather “Taoist”sage in the Chuang Tzu stories (ca. 300 b.c.e.). And there are the up-and-downreputations of the “greats,” such as Mencius (fl. ca. 300 b.c.e.), who was notelevated to the official Confucian canon until 40 generations later by theNeo-Confucians around 1050–1200 c.e. (Graham, 1958: xiv, 158).7The dose of realism provided by the long-term view is a salutary (ifunwelcome) antidote to our personal egotism, and to that projected egotismwhich we attach to our hero-ideals, the rare “genius” of generations past whomwe pattern ourselves upon in our inner imagination. Intellectuals make theirbreakthroughs, changing the course of the flow of ideas, because of what theydo with the cultural capital and emotional energy flowing down to them fromtheir own pasts, restructured by the network of tensions among their contemporaries.The merit of their contributions, its “intrinsic worth” as well as“social impact,” is a matter of how the structure develops after their owndeaths. We intellectuals are truly eddies in the river of time—perhaps more sothan other humans, because it is our business to attend to this connectednessacross the generations.Creativity, then, is for the long haul. Let us be clear what this means. Theminimal unit of intellectual change is a generation, approximately 33 years. It60 • The Skeleton of Theorytakes at least that long for a significant change to take place in philosophicalpremises; and it takes at least another generation or two to see if the changehas a structural impact on what later intellectuals can do. Sociologists can seethis in our own discipline: we are clear on who are the classic sociologists(Weber, Durkheim, Mead, Simmel) of 1900–1930 or so, but the generationimmediately after them was just in the process of winnowing down thosenames from a larger pool;8 and in their own lifetimes and shortly after, theirreputations were fluctuating and sometimes rather localized and minor. Acreative work that receives attention for 5 or even 10 or 20 years may be onlya minor fluctuation, too brief to be picked up in the long-term perspective ofintellectual history. To get a sense of the magnitude of processes involved here,one might attempt to estimate how much space the “postmodernist” philosophersmaking a stir in the 1980s are likely to take up in the histories ofphilosophy that might be written two centuries, or even two generations, fromnow—and the same, of course, for today’s participants in the future historiesof sociology, or any other discipline. The sociological issue is to see therelationship between the human foreground of any particular generation (andindeed the still shorter periods of a few years or decades that make up thefocus of an intellectual’s immediate projects), and the vastly more impersonal,ruthlessly structured sequence of generations that is the realm of creativity wecall historically “great.”What Do Minor Philosophers Do?This viewpoint may leave us with a nagging doubt. Are we dealing only withfame, not with creativity itself? Is it not possible that there have been manycreative individuals, buried in obscurity, who have simply not received creditfor their advances? This is a powerful image because it sustains most of usintellectuals, who rarely get the credit we think we deserve. And, like aresurrection myth, it holds out a promise: retrospective discovery after ourdeaths. Let us see.The instances of posthumous fame that we do know are never pure ragsto-riches stories. The most important case in Western philosophy is Spinoza,whose vogue came, about 100 years after his death, as the favorite of onefaction in the Idealist controversies at the time of Kant. But Spinoza had acertain notoriety in his own day; he was well enough situated to be visited andplagiarized by Leibniz, and he began in the Cartesian network near its mostactive center. Nietzsche struggled in obscurity for 20 years before becomingfamous during his last years of madness. Schopenhauer had a longer drought,and receiving fame only when he was very old, and mostly after his death. Butboth Nietzsche and Schopenhauer from early adulthood were well connectedNetworks across the Generations • 61to major intellectual networks, and their conflicts with their compatriots arenot at all contrary to the usual dynamics of creative network contact. And allof them were prolific publishers, a pattern correlated with eminence (Price,1986; Simonton, 1988); they had the emotional energy and the cultural capitalthat is typical of creative success. Rediscoveries of “lost works” would not bepossible at all unless there was some connection to the networks of theintellectual world so that they could be retrieved. And that means intellectualsmust make those connections in their own lifetime, or their work will nevermake it after their death.What about creative work that is just plain buried forever? Here it becomesrelevant to know what intellectual life is like as one moves away from thecenter. As we get farther from the major figures on the network charts, itbecomes increasingly characteristic for philosophers to develop the ideas of alineage chief, to add criticisms, explications, and commentaries. They are notcreative precisely because they are followers. This is quite common in the ranksof “secondary” figures, although this pool also includes figures who stand ontheir own, who fail to make the deep intellectual impact that would leave themin the historical first rank. A typical secondary figure of this independent sortwould be Yang Chu (fl. 380 b.c.e.) in the generation after Mo Ti and beforeMencius. Yang Chu broke through prevailing consensus by preaching thedoctrine that the natural is not inherently moral or sociable, and that radicalindividualism is itself natural (Graham, 1978: 59). In Greece a comparablelevel of importance would be represented by Gorgias, the famous rhetor andSophist; or Xenophanes, who attacked anthropomorphic polytheism; or Stilpo,the most acute of the Megarian logicians. These men were not epigones; someindeed were extremely eminent in their own day. Mencius declared, somewhatrhetorically, that “the words of Yang Chu and Mo Tzu fill the world” (Mencius3b.9), and Gorgias in his day was perhaps more famous than Socrates. Thatthese secondary figures differ from the major ones becomes apparent only inthe long run, as their ideas are sifted over; some are very influential, but theirideas are too easily absorbed by the discourse of the next generation (as withthose of Yang Chu and Xenophanes), others proving ephemeral because thenetwork turns in a different direction (as with Gorgias).No buried treasures here; perhaps we may find real treasures as we reassesstheir merits, but there is nothing buried about them. Can closet creativity thenbe lurking in the ranks of the minor figures? But minor figures are the typicalepigones—loyal, scholarly, perhaps polemical against opponents. What theylack above all is originality and depth. Nor are minor figures necessarilyobscure in their own day. Let Wang T’ung stand for many (224 in the key toFigure 6.2): a famous Confucian lecturer in the capital city of Ch’ang-an ca.600 c.e., teacher of hundreds of students, including many of the politicians62 • The Skeleton of Theorywho founded the T’ang dynasty. His contemporaries were very impressed:“Since the time of Confucius there has been nobody like him . . . He perpetratedthe Odes and the History, rectified the Rites and music, compiled theFirst Classic [i.e., chronicle of 289–589 c.e., in imitation of Confucius’ Springand Autumn Annals] and extolled the teaching in the Changes. With him, thegreat principles of the sages and all things that can be done in the world, havebeen brought to completion” (quoted in Fung, 1948: 2:407). Yet the modernhistorian Fung Yu-lan calls him a minor figure who produced unremarkableeditions of the classics. Some of the other modern historians mention him (e.g.,Needham, 1956: 452), others neglect him; his fame was ephemeral and withouthistorical impact. There are hundreds more like him, in every part of the world:long lines of Stoic, Epicurean, Academic teachers—Diogenes of Babylon, Clitomachus,Apollodorus “the Tyrant of the Garden,” and many others—whosenames are not of much interest even to specialists. But these men wrotenumerous books, packed lecture halls, were sent as ambassadors by their cities.The most eminent academics of today are cast in their mold.Some persons get a minor level of attention in our histories, not so muchbecause of their own fame but because they were associates of more importantpeople, or happened to figure in some curious or noteworthy historical event.We know of associates of Confucius or Mencius who appear only as interlocutorsin their dialogues, of bystanders in the Zen histories, of Philostratus (172in Figure 3.5) who happens to have been a teacher of Cleopatra. On the Chinachart, the incidental figure (311 in Figure 6.4) above the Ch’eng brothers,connecting them to the preceding philosophers Chang Tsai and Chou Tun-I,is Ch’eng Hsiang, the father of these key Neo-Confucians. I preserve suchfigures in the charts because they sometimes have this facilitating effect; attimes without them crucial linkages would not be made.9Such figures give us a sense of the routine parts of the intellectual world,the minor leagues and sub-minor leagues on which major centers of networkattention occasionally peak. If we like, we can push further. More specializedhistorians magnify the milieu with which they deal, and bring other minor orsub-minor figures into view. Li T’ung-hsuan (232 in Figure 6.2) is not evenmentioned in the main histories of Chinese or Buddhist philosophy, but getsconsiderable space in Odin (1982) on Hua-yen philosophy. The magnifyingglass, where available, sometimes shows us intellectuals possessing considerableskill in rearranging, systematizing, and popularizing a position; but itconfirms our picture that creativity is rare. Such glimpses are useful, too, inunderstanding the barren periods on our chart. Is it just our unsympatheticbias that makes the Yuan and early Ming dynasties (1300–1450 c.e.) look sodevoid of philosophy? No, the records are there; some figures can be draggedinto the light (see, e.g., Dardess, 1983: 131–181, who shows us some Con-Networks across the Generations • 63fucians absorbed in political reform), but they serve to confirm our impressionof intellectual routine in philosophy proper.Perhaps the outermost fringe of the intellectual world that we can grasphistorically consists of persons who have no eminence at all, even in their owntime, not even through incidental connections with the more famous. Theyshow up in historical sources on ordinary life, and are sometimes brought tolight by a historian such as Elizabeth Rawson (1985: 49), who would like todisplay the reading habits of ordinary people in the provinces, in this caselandowners in the Roman countryside ca. 50 b.c.e. There were apparentlymany such people, from our adventitious sample, scattered here and there, notonly reading but expounding Epicurean and Stoic ideas. We know we are inthe intellectual provinces because the ideas are not only old but garbled. Theystand in contrast even to those of our “minor” philosophers, who were afterall persons of some importance in the intellectual networks of their own day.It is good to know about this fringe, for the sake of realism, and good to know,too, because it makes us understand ourselves. The horizontal spread ofintellectual structures does not change much over the centuries; we too live ina mass of readers and would-be writers, reflecting old ideas without knowingwhat we are doing, dreaming of intellectual glory. Creative epochs are rarerthan routine ones; and even at the best of times, the inner circles of theintellectual world are surrounded by peripheries upon peripheries, where mostof us live.10The Structural Mold of Intellectual Life:Long-Term Chains in China and GreeceIt has been conventional in intellectual history to write in terms of “schools.”Texts as far back as the Warring States period of ancient China (before 220b.c.e.) spoke, somewhat rhetorically, of “the hundred schools” (chia) (see, e.g.,Chuang Tzu, chap. 33). Diogenes Laertius (ca. 200 c.e.) grouped his biographiesinto Ionian and Italian schools or “successions.” But at least four differentthings can be meant by “school.”The loosest meaning, that individuals have similar modes of thought, neednot imply anything about their social organization. About 100 b.c.e. theofficial Han historian Ssu-ma T’an first grouped earlier Chinese philosophersinto six “schools,” among them the “Taoist school,” for texts resembling theTao Te Ching. But Tao was a term used in many different intellectual campsover the previous centuries, and the emergence of a tightly organized Taoistreligion was to come in the centuries after. Such “schools of thought” are notvery important unless they are based on more tangible structures.A more rigorous use of the concept of school is to demonstrate intellectualinfluences among its members. This is the principal pursuit of intellectual64 • The Skeleton of Theoryhistorians. Nevertheless, I will not pursue “schools” of this sort. Transmissionof intellectual influence certainly occurs, but it is not an explanation, in thesense of showing why, out of all the persons who could read or hear of anidea, a certain few become important by shaping their cultural capital in newdirections. Left to itself, the tracing of “influences” implies an infinite regress,in which every thinker’s ideas can always be traced back to yet anotherpreceding influence. The channel that carries the energies of intellectual creativityis more than ideas floating in an atmosphere of influence, even if we canpin down such influence to the presence of a certain text in the personal libraryof a certain thinker; the central channel is the personal contact of face-to-faceencounters. I will demonstrate the paramount importance of two further kindsof “schools” or “circles.”One of these involves chains of personal relationships, of which the mostimportant are relationships between teachers and their pupils; besides thesevertical ties are horizontal links of personal contacts among contemporaries.Finally, a “school” can be literally an organization: a place where teachingtakes place and authority and property are passed down through an explicitsuccession, as in the Platonic Academy, the Aristotelean Lyceum, or Chu Hsi’sNeo-Confucian White Deer Hollow Academy. Here the doctrine is part of theorganizational property and an emblem of its social identity.Figures 2.1 and 2.2, as well as most of the other network figures in thisbook, illustrate the third type—chains of personal relationships. It is easy torecognize on these charts the fourth type as well—formally organized schools.11What, then, do the Chinese and Greek network charts show? The first thingwhich should strike us is the extent to which the named figures, especially themajor ones (printed in all capitals) are linked to other philosophers. These linksare both vertical (master-pupil chains across the generations) and horizontal(links of acquaintanceship among contemporaries). For the important figures,these links are at all levels of eminence; the bigger stars are connected to moremajor and secondary figures than anyone else is, but to more minor figures aswell.12The most notable philosophers are not organizational isolates but membersof chains of teachers and students who are themselves known philosophers,and/or of circles of significant contemporary intellectuals. The most notablephilosophers are likely to be students of other highly notable philosophers. Inaddition to this vertical organization of social networks across generations,creative intellectuals tend to belong to groups of intellectual peers, both circlesof allies and sometimes also of rivals and debaters.For Greece, I have divided philosophers into dominant, major, secondary,and minor figures. Network links are calculated both backward (to predecessorsand associates) and forward (to pupils).13 Calling these the “upstream”and “downstream” sides of the networks, we find:Networks across the Generations • 65Greek philosophers Upstream links Downstream linksDominant (8) 3.8 4.0Major (20) 2.0 2.2Secondary (68) 1.3 1.0Minor (237) 0.7 0.4The dominant philosophers have, on the average, considerably more predecessorsand associates who are intellectually significant than other major philosophersdo, and so on down the line. The disparities are even greater on theoutput side. Moreover, if we examine the network in regard to the eminenceof those intellectuals to whom each one is linked, we find that the more eminentphilosophers themselves tend to be more closely linked to others at high levelsof eminence. Of 28 philosophers at the major and dominant levels, 18 (64percent) are linked to others at those levels, compared to 33 of 68 (49 percent)secondary philosophers who are so linked. Generally speaking, the higher upin the ranking of eminence, the more connections: Socrates is directly connectedwith 3 other major philosophers and with 11 secondary ones; Plato is connectedwith 3 major and 6 secondary philosophers.For Chinese philosophers, the pattern is similar:Chinese philosophers Upstream links Downstream linksDominant (9) 4.7 6.0Major (16) 2.4 1.6Secondary (61) 1.5 1.0Minor (356) 1.0 0.4Again, the philosophers who dominate long periods of intellectual life have byfar the largest number of links to both predecessors and successors. Here weare dealing only with their immediate contacts, in their own generation andthose just before and after. If we examine the chain extending backwards intime, we see that the more important the philosopher, the more eminent hiscontacts within successive links in the chain:China: dominant philosophers (9): 2 steps 4 stepsNumber of major or dominant philosophersupstream 2.1 3.3Number of secondary philosophers upstream 1.9 3.0Both kinds upstream 4.0 6.3China: major philosophers (16): 2 steps 4 stepsMajor or dominant philosophers upstream 0.8 1.4Secondary philosophers upstream 1.6 2.5Both kinds upstream 2.4 3.966 • The Skeleton of TheoryChina: secondary philosophers (61): 2 steps 4 stepsMajor or dominant philosophers upstream 0.6 1.0Secondary philosophers upstream 1.0 1.7Both kinds upstream 1.6 2.7Two links typically cover one’s own contemporaries plus the generation ofone’s mentors (although dense networks might use up 2 or more links in thepresent). Four links allow for a more complicated chain.14 In Figure 2.1Kung-sun Lung is connected to Mencius, in the previous generation, throughseveral intermediaries; and Mencius himself connects back to Mo Ti 3 generationsin the past.The stars of Chinese philosophy existed in a neighborhood consisting of,on the average, 2 major and an additional 2 secondary philosophers within2 links of themselves; going backwards or outwards 4 links, each was typicallyconnected to more than 6 other important thinkers. Major philosopherswho are not dominant stars are rather less well connected to other majorphilosophers (they have slightly less than 1 tie two steps away, and slightlymore than 1 tie within 4 steps), although their connections to secondarythinkers are almost as good as the stars’. And secondary philosophers areconnected backwards still more modestly, but above the level of minor philosophers.The Greeks are much the same:Greece: dominant philosophers (8): 2 steps 4 stepsNumber of major or dominant philosophersupstream 1.8 3.9Secondary philosophers upstream 4.1 8.3Both kinds upstream 5.9 12.1Greece: major philosophers (20): 2 steps 4 stepsMajor or dominant philosophers upstream 0.9 2.2Secondary philosophers upstream 1.0 2.7Both kinds upstream 1.9 4.9Greece: secondary philosophers (68): 2 steps 4 stepsMajor or dominant philosophers upstream 0.7 1.6Secondary philosophers upstream 1.5 2.9Both kinds upstream 2.2 4.5The immediate neighborhood of the most eminent Greek philosophers is muchlike that of their Chinese counterparts. These Greeks have even more connectionswith secondary figures than the Chinese do, so that within 4 linksNetworks across the Generations • 67upstream they connect to an average of 12 significant philosophers. Theordinary major philosophers (non-stars) in both places have about the samekinds of connections. We do see, though, that secondary philosophers in Greecehave rather better connections deep in their networks (4 links) than the secondaryChinese; in fact, Greek secondary philosophers have about the samenumber of deep links as ordinary major philosophers. This is because so manysecondary philosophers are close downstream from the dominant Greeks, withtheir huge connections; secondary figures such as Crates the Cynic, Speusippus,or Antisthenes benefit from tying into the lineages behind Plato or Socrates.This high density of Greek philosophical networks in several periods is onlypartly matched in China, with the high network density around the time ofthe Chi-hsia Academy, and again with the “Dark Learning” group, the Ch’anlineages, and the Neo-Confucians.The result of this continued density across the generations is that theimportant Greek philosophers inherit the intellectual capital and stimulationof a very large indirect community. Plato is within 2 links of Gorgias, and 4links of Protagoras, Empedocles, Parmenides, and Pythagoras. Epicurus is 4links from Democritus but also from Socrates; Arcesilaus, the skeptical reformerof the Academy, is 2 links from both Aristotle and Zeno the Stoic, andwithin 4 links of Socrates. Aristotle’s deep network includes 6 major and 12secondary philosophers; that of Chrysippus, the most acute of the Stoics,includes 7 majors and 10 secondaries. Eminence, it seems, breeds eminence,and the more densely the better.The Importance of Personal TiesWhat does it mean that eminent philosophers have the most ties vertically andhorizontally, especially with other eminent philosophers? We might suspectsome methodological artifacts. Perhaps we know of more connections of majorphilosophers with minor figures simply because more information is preservedabout the stars, including the names of their pupils and associates. But recallthat “minor” figures in the charts were typically rather notable persons in theirown day, of independent if local standing. Figures whom we know about onlybecause they are mentioned in the context of some other figure are not “minor”but incidental, a separate category not at issue here.More serious is the possibility that what we consider to be the creativeeminence of philosophers is merely the result of their having had a great manypersonal followers. The followers retrospectively create the eminence. Isn’t ittautological to define persons as eminent when they are well connected in their68 • The Skeleton of Theoryintellectual communities, then argue that the cause of their eminence is thisconnection? The answer is no; there is less circularity than meets the eye. Itcan be shown that the model is not simply required by our implicit definitions.For one thing, there are empirical exceptions. In the Greco-Roman world,the important isolates from chains of significant followers are Heraclitus, Philoof Alexandria, and the Skeptic Aenesidemus. In China, the major isolates arethe anonymous author of the Tao Te Ching, and the Han dynasty philosopherTung Chung-shu; and among secondary figures, the early “legalist” politiciansShen Pu-hai and Shang Yang (both fl. 350 b.c.e.), and the Han dynastyrationalist Wang Ch’ung. Moreover, there are a number of cases of “twilight”creativity, when the most distinguished achievements are made at the end ofthe line, lacking even minor pupils to carry them on. Augustine is the primeexample in the Greco-Roman orbit; in Islam, Avicenna (Ibn Sina, fl. 1120).Hegel, who overrated the prevalence of the pattern that “the owl of Minervaflies at dusk,” was apparently thinking of himself as an exemplar, but his ownpupils proved him wrong.It is also possible to conceive of a historical pattern in which eminentphilosophers are not contemporaries, nor personally connected in chains, normembers of the same organizations, nor concentrated in the same places. Thatsuch structures are empirically found is not due to a conceptual tautology.15I have argued that in a sense reputation is not really distinct from creativity;that what we consider intellectual greatness is having produced ideas whichaffect later generations, who either repeat them, develop them further, or reactagainst them. It does not follow as a matter of definition that a great thinkeris one who has a personal network of eminent followers; hypothetically, one’sideas could affect later generations without this personal transmission. Havingsaid this, I would add that it is possible to assess whether some individualsreceived more retrospective eminence than they deserve, in the sense that theydid not really produce the ideas which are later attributed to them.This kind of renown is especially likely for originators of chains. Thales istraditionally regarded as the first Greek philosopher and the first mathematician;but it is not at all clear that he was a very innovative intellectual in hisown right. He is counted as one of the “Seven Sages” of antiquity; but theoldest source that gives him this title is Plato, 200 years later.16 The other“Sages” are not strictly what we would call philosophers, but primarily politicianswho were known for their astute practical judgment and their pithysayings. Solon, Thales’ contemporary and probable acquaintance, was somewhatmore of an intellectual in that he was both a law giver and a poet, butothers such as Pittacus or Bias of Priene were simply famous politicians. As inthese other cases, Thales was known for his political advice at a time whenNetworks across the Generations • 69the city-states were undergoing major struggles over the establishment ofdemocracy, and in which “tyrants”—who included a number of the “Sages”—played a role as arbiters, lawgivers, and setters of precedents. Thales seems tohave played this role in Miletus. His special eminence in what became knownas “philosophy” may well be due to the fact that he had some connection withAnaximander, the first writer of a book on cosmology, and he in turn with athird-generation thinker, Anaximenes.Thales does not pose a serious problem since he is only a secondary figureby the long-term criterion of how much attention he gets in later histories;Anaximander, by contrast, is at least a borderline major figure. Confucius isperhaps more seriously overestimated. Along with Chu Hsi, he is the dominantfigure in terms of attention received across the whole of Chinese thought. Muchof his fame is as a cult figure, rather than for the content of what he actuallytaught. Confucius made an important breakthrough with his doctrine of howindividuals should behave and states should be ordered by deference to traditionalrituals and documents. But it is clear that “Confucianism” as a sophisticatedposition about human nature, moral issues, rationality, and cosmologywas created by later philosophers of much greater intellectual complexity suchas Mencius, Hsün Tzu, and Tung Chung-shu, not to mention the still greatermetaphysical departures of the Neo-Confucians. What stuck to Confucius’name was primarily the ideology of attributing all intellectual virtue to thepast, initially to the old documents themselves, and gradually to Confucius andeventually a canonized Mencius and even Chu Hsi.17 It is clear that withoutthe much later successes of the Confucian school, Confucius himself wouldhave figured as of no greater importance than Mo Ti, or even Yang Chu orShang Yang.Mo Ti is probably overrated in the same sense; though he made an importantnew departure with his utilitarianism and ethical universalism, he is probablyof greatest importance in having founded an organization which graduallyturned from military to intellectual activities. The lesser-known figures whoperfected Mohist logic four or five generations after Mo Ti are probably responsiblefor his position as a major figure in a long-term view of Chinese intellectualhistory. In the West a comparable case might be Pythagoras, perhapsmost important as a founder of an organization which built up philosophicaland mathematical doctrines to a high level, reflecting back retrospective gloryon the founder.What do such cases do to our overall assessment of network patterns? Inmy opinion they do not shake the theoretical results, and even reinforces them.Perhaps we should lower the ranking of some of these figures. But since theycome early in the charts, and hence lack eminent predecessors (although MoTi and Pythagoras seem to be connected via minor or incidental figures to70 • The Skeleton of Theorywhatever eminent predecessors there were), to reduce their ranking wouldenhance the average connectedness among the truly eminent. And it makessense that major philosophical creativity does not jump out of nowhere. ForChina, the takeoff generation is apparently that of Mencius, Hui Shih, andChuang Tzu, just as in Greece it is the generation of Heraclitus and Parmenides.18We might also question the significance of horizontal connections amongmajor philosophers. That Socrates or Cicero knew virtually everybody of hisday might be a trivial circumstance, simply the clubbing together of peoplewho were already eminent, much in the same way that today movie stars andother celebrities are invited to meet one another, without any effect on howthey happened to become famous in the first place. This is a possibility we cancheck. In many instances the contacts contributed something because theypreceded later creative productions; this is the case with Cicero, and withSocrates’ many contacts in his youth. For the most part, I would judge, contactsamong the eminent are not simply the “clubbing together” phenomenon; thehorizontal connections are substantively important. But it is not strictly amatter of “influence” in the conventional sense, where one person passes ideasto the other. We see this most graphically where persons are in close contactlong before any of them becomes creative.19 I suggest three processes, overlappingbut analytically distinct, that operate through personal contacts. One isthe passing of cultural capital, of ideas and the sense of what to do with them;another is the transfer of emotional energy, both from the exemplars ofprevious successes and from contemporaneous buildup in the cauldron of agroup; the third involves the structural sense of intellectual possibilities, especiallyrivalrous ones.These processes operate in all types of personal contacts, the vertical chainsof masters and pupils as well as the horizontal contacts among contemporaries.Consider the question: Why are vertical ties so prevalent, and why are theycorrelated with the degree of eminence? One might answer that the chains passalong intellectual capital: Aristotle is eminent because he received such a goodeducation from Plato, who in turn was well educated by his contacts withSocrates, Archytas, Euclid of Megara, and others. This is surely not the wholestory, since the eminent figures of the younger generation make their reputationnot by repeating their received cultural capital but by elaborating it in newdirections. But granted the importance of these intellectual resources, why isit that they are so often received through personal contacts rather than moredistantly from books?For very early periods, of course, the latter was not possible. Strictlyspeaking, philosophy as we are considering it, in every culture area, only beginsafter the time when writing came into use. But it took some time before newNetworks across the Generations • 71ideas were typically circulated in writing. Confucius’ sayings were writtendown as the Analects by the generation of his pupils (ca. 470–430 b.c.e.); andthe texts known as the Mo Tzu and the Chuang Tzu clearly came after thelifetimes of their eponymous authors, although in the case of Chuang Tzu theycertainly include some writing of his own. It is not that these thinkers claimedto teach only orally. Confucius is credited with writing the Spring and AutumnAnnals, a historical work later subject to endless analysis for occult significances;and the books of Hui Shih, earlier than Chuang Tzu, are said tohave filled several carts (Chuang-Tzu, chap. 33).20 Similarly in Greece, Heraclitus,who shunned people generally, allegedly deposited his book in thetemple of Artemis at Ephesus. Whereas Socrates is famous for his personal oralstyle, his contemporary Democritus is credited with 60 books, and by this timethere was an open market for books.21The significance of the breakthrough to writing is controversial. Eric Havelock(1982, 1986) goes so far as to argue that Plato’s generation was the firstto become oriented to written texts rather than oral recitations, and thatphilosophical abstractions were not possible until this transition was made.But the Greek philosophical community goes back some six generations beforethis, if in a context of a literacy still subordinate to oral ritualism. Havelock’sargument does not apply well to the chronology of Chinese intellectuals, whowere oriented to written symbols very early, and constituted a kind of cult ofwriting that began many generations before Confucius. The very identity of ascholar was his familiarity with books, although this was most characteristicof the earliest period (the rise of the Confucians around 500 b.c.e.), and againafter the establishment of the unified dynasties (221 b.c.e.). In between, theimportance of oral discourse increased, rather than decreased, as intellectuallife was shaped especially by the face-to-face debate at courts during theWarring States period. Havelock overgeneralizes a model of primordial orality,which he conceives as conservative ritual embedded in and upholding thepublic social order; yet the oral discourse of an intellectual community needbe neither concretized nor conservative.In principle, soon after the early intellectual networks arose, one couldacquire the important philosophical doctrines without personal contact withthe author. Personal closeness gave some advantage, of course, in times ofclumsy and slow channels of written publication. But it is striking, as we lookacross the whole span of known history, that the pattern of personal connectionsdoes not change in any significant degree from the most ancient times tothe most recent. The personal chains are still there in late Greco-Romanantiquity just as they are near the beginning. Wang Yang-ming’s network ca.1500 c.e., when book publishing was quite a big business, is very little differentfrom Mencius’ 1,800 years earlier. The clincher is that the same kinds of72 • The Skeleton of Theorynetworks exist in modern European philosophy, right up through the twentiethcentury (see Figures 10.1 through 14.1). We still see chains running fromBrentano to Gadamer, Marcuse, and Arendt, and from Frege to Wittgensteinand Quine, and groups in Vienna, Paris, and elsewhere.22 I would venture topredict that the importance of personal connections will not decline in thefuture, no matter what overlay of new communications technology is invented.E-mail, or any other form of communication which opens up a dispersed anddefocused structure of communications, will not substitute for the focusedchains which are the core of intellectual life.What then is being passed through these personal chains? Intellectualcapital, to be sure. The reason why books are not as valuable as personalcontacts is that a general exposure to the ideas of the time is not sufficient forfirst-rate intellectual performance; what personal contact with a leading practitionerdoes is to focus attention on those aspects of the larger mass of ideaswhich constitute the analytical cutting edge. Of course, creative intellectuals ofeach new generation take off from this point in new directions. Personalcontact with leaders of the previous generation can help here too, not so muchin the substance as in the style of work; there is a transmission of emotionalenergy, and of a role model showing how to aim at the highest levels ofintellectual work.Emotional energy is intensified to high levels in the interaction rituals ofeveryday life by strongly focused group interactions. The experience of witnessinga famous teacher surrounded by pupils is a motivating one, eventhough, for reasons that we will see presently, few pupils get full benefit. Thesame experience occurs in horizontal group contacts. A group such as the“Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove” is simultaneously building up the creativeinspiration among all its members; without one another, their more extremeflights of fancy and iconoclasm would surely not have taken wing.Contacts with opponents is just as emotionally intensifying as contact withone’s allies, perhaps even more so. It is for this reason that intellectuals seemto be drawn to their opponents; they seek them out, like magnets tugging ateach other’s opposite poles. The intellectual world at its most intense has thestructure of contending groups, meshing together into a conflictual super-community.The horizontal ties that meshed at Athens at the time of Socrates andhis successors formed the same kind of structure that built up the excitementof the Chi-hsia Academy and its rivals during the Warring States, that existedamong the Buddhist factions in the early T’ang, and again among the multipleschools of the Sung dynasty which crystallized in the Neo-Confucians. Intellectualsare excited by the flow of ideas, by the prospects for development, bytheir struggles with their enemies; and this is so even if they are lookingbackwards toward restoration of some ancient or even eternal ideal. The ritualNetworks across the Generations • 73density of interactions among intellectuals drives up their energy—all the moreso when famous names come together, rival sacred objects embodied in actualpersons, bathing their audience in the clash of their auras.These energies are channeled in particular directions. Intellectual fieldsallow only certain possibilities to flourish at a given time. To know about thesepossibilities, to have a sense of what is opening up, it is crucial to be in thethick of things, and especially to be in contact with one’s rivals. Thus, majorintellectuals meeting one another do not necessarily communicate any intellectualcapital; they may not learn anything at all substantive from one another.The fact that the rival Neo-Confucians Chu Hsi and Lu Chiu-yüan met anddebated perhaps added nothing to each other’s repertoire of ideas. But the verysituation that brought them together must have involved a long-standingconsciousness of a split in the intellectual field, and this in itself encouragedboth Chu and Lu to develop such positions, expanding them into rival supersystems.The Structural CrunchAt the level of the flow of ideas and emotions, there is a disparity betweencauses and effects. If contact with eminent forebears and contemporaries isimportant to creativity, as is living in a time when there are structural rivalries,there are nevertheless many more individuals who are exposed to these conditionsthan there are newborn intellectual stars. Confucius was reputed to have1,000 pupils, Theophrastus (perhaps more accurately and less rhetorically) iscredited with 2,000 (DSB, 1981: 13:328). Of these my charts list 11 ofConfucius’ pupils (1 borderline minor, the rest at minor rank or below), and4 of Theophrastus’ (1 major, 1 secondary). We know the names of some ofCicero’s compatriots who studied with the same array of philosophers atAthens and Rhodes (Rawson, 1985: 6–13), but only Cicero reaped the intellectualand emotional resources to make himself famous in philosophy. We canbe sure that for every major philosopher capable of transmitting significantcultural capital and emotional energy, there were many more pupils who hadthe opportunity to reinvest these resources than actually did so.Does this mean that our sociological model is inevitably incomplete andneeds supplementing with psychological, individual, and other idiosyncraticcircumstances? It would seem prudent to admit that it does. But this sort ofdistinction would rest on a misunderstanding. Individuals do not stand apartfrom society, as if they are what they are without ever having interacted withanyone else. We could go into further detail about just what social experiences,what chains of interaction rituals of the sort described in Chapter 1, havegenerated their individuality.23 The particularity of the individual is the particularityof the social path.74 • The Skeleton of TheoryLet us put this question aside for the moment. The main theoretical problemis not that what I have said so far is too sociological, but that it is notsociological enough; it omits a key fact about the structure of intellectualnetworks. The structure of the intellectual world allows only a limited numberof positions to receive much attention at any one time. There are only a smallnumber of slots to be filled, and once they are filled up, there are overwhelmingpressures against anyone else pressing through to the top ranks.In addition to the necessary advantages of getting the most relevant culturalcapital, of being in the situations that heighten one’s emotional energy to acreative pitch, of becoming aware of structural possibilities as they open up,it is also necessary to be first. One must be in the lead, or else the structuralpossibilities, as far as the individual is concerned, begin to close down. Opportunitiesand encouragement, both objective and subjective, flow cumulativelyto those few persons who get a head start down the structural channels;they dry up for others who may initially be not far behind. It is the sense ofthese forces flowing in the intellectual world that moves some people to dropout, to give up on intellectual dreams of eminence, or perhaps to stay in thefield but settle for a subsidiary career as commentator or expositor, perhapsto retail others’ ideas to a provincial audience, perhaps to go into politics orsome other field where one’s competition is not head-to-head with otherintellectuals on their home turf.Creativity is squeezed out of the structure, so to speak, through small openings.But these openings always have the size to let several thinkers throughat a time; creative breaks seem to occur simultaneously in several directions.We see this pattern strongly in the network charts (Figures 4.1 through 4.4and 6.1 through 6.5 for China, 3.1, 3.2, and 3.4 through 3.8 for Greece).In China, major figures typically match up with major rivals in theirgeneration: Mencius, Chuang Tzu, and Hui Shih; Kung-sun Lung overlapping(and debating) with Tsou Yen, and he in turn with Hsün-Tzu; the Buddhiststars Fa-tsang and Hui-Neng; the creative generations of neo-Confucianism,first with Chang Tsai, Shao Yung, and Chou Tun-I; then Chu Hsi and LuChiu-yüan. Secondary figures also appear in contemporaneous clusters. Somephilosophers are matched with others of slightly lower rank, but completeisolates from significant competition are very few.It is the same with the Greeks. The key figures come on the scene as rivalswithin the same generation: Parmenides and Heraclitus; the stars of the Sophisticmovement, together with Socrates as well as Democritus; Aristotle andDiogenes the Cynic; Epicurus and Zeno the Stoic founding their rival schoolsat Athens within a few years of each other. When we include the secondaryfigures with the stars, the pattern of simultaneously appearing creativity becomesoverwhelming.24Networks across the Generations • 75The structure of simultaneous and opposing creativity leads us on to thelaw of small numbers, and the struggle to divide the intellectual attention space,which will occupy us throughout the following chapters. Not only Greek andChinese but also Indian, Japanese, Islamic, medieval Jewish and Christian, andmodern European philosophers appear in tightly focused networks of rivals.Here we need take only the general point that the structural crunch is a patternof both network density and creativity driven by conflict. The famous names,and the semi-famous ones as well who hold the stage less long, are thosepersons situated at just those points where the networks heat up the emotionalenergy to the highest pitch. Creativity is the friction of the attention space atthe moments when the structural blocks are grinding against one another thehardest. The most influential innovations occur where there is a maximum ofboth vertical and horizontal density of the networks, where the chains ofcreative conflict have built up over an unbroken chain of generations.The structural conditions which make this possible are the subject of thechapters that follow. Here I anticipate a fact which emerges from an overviewof all the networks of world philosophy. The total number of philosopherswho are significant in world history is approximately 135 to 500 persons: thesmaller number if we take only the major figures in each world civilization,the intermediate one if we add the secondary figures.25 The distribution ofphilosophers for all networks is shown in Table 2.1.Even if we add the minor figures in all the networks discussed in this book,the total is still only 2,700, a tiny fraction of the population of the world overthese generations (an estimated 23 billion people who lived between 600 b.c.e.and 1900 c.e.; calculated from McEvedy and Jones, 1978: 342–354). Theintellectual world of long-term fame is much more sharply stratified than theeconomic-political structure of societies, even in those periods when rulingaristocracies were less than 5 percent of the populace. Moreover, before 1600c.e. or later, disciplines were relatively little differentiated; after that date mostof the scientific and scholarly fields branched off from the networks of philosophers,and the networks include many of the most famous founders ofsuch fields. Hence this total ranging from 150 to fewer than 3,000 personsaccounted for virtually all of the intellectual accomplishment in the “theoretical”fields of knowledge until quite recently—excluding the fields of literature,music, and the fine arts, which had their own networks.For the reader of our own time, a question arises in looking over thesenetworks: Where are the women? I have assembled these networks by collectingthe names which have dominated attention among intellectuals over thelast 25 centuries, and there are very few women among them. In China therewere a few women among the religious Taoists; in the Islamic world some ofthe Sufi mystics; in medieval Christendom, where philosophy was based in76 • The Skeleton of Theoryuniversities consisting exclusively of men, women had an intellectual role onlyin devotional religious movements and some of the secular courts. Does thismean that the history of world philosophy is simply the expression of a maleviewpoint? Until very recently it has been overwhelmingly populated by males;yet it is hardly possible to lump it into one category as a male viewpoint. Thebasic structure of intellectual life is division among rival viewpoints. Malenessdoes not predict who will be an idealist or a materialist, rationalist or mystic,or any of the other lines of demarcation which have existed within philosophy.Throughout world history, when women have been in the intellectualattention space it was most often as religious mystics. But mysticism is not auniquely female form of thought, and most mystics have been men. Theconnection is organizational, not a matter of intrinsic mentalities; mysticismhas been the part of the intellectual field which flourishes best outside of tightlyorganized lineages and hence has been most open to outsiders, and thus towomen. The issue is not male and female mentalities, which would be areductionist explanation, but social discrimination on the level of the materialbase. It is not individuals, whether male or female, let alone of any skin color,that produce ideas, but the flow of networks through individuals. Historically,in the times when women had access to the networks at the center of intellectualattention, they filled an array of philosophical positions (Waithe, 1987–1995). Among the Greeks, the Epicurean materialists were the lineage mostTABLE 2.1. DISTRIBUTION OF PHILOSOPHERS FOR ALL NETWORKSCivilization Generations Major SecondaryTotalimportant(major secondary) Minor TotalChina (535 b.c.e.–1565 c.e.) 63 25 61 86 356 440Greece (600 b.c.e.–600 c.e.) 36 28 68 96 237 330India (800 b.c.e.–1800 c.e.) 78 22 53 75 272 350Japan (600–1935 c.e.) 40 20 36 56 157 210Islam/Judaism(700–1600 c.e.) 27 11 41 52 420 470Christendom(1000–1600 c.e.) 18 11 46 57 360 420Europe (1600–1900 c.e.) 9 19 61 80 350 430‘Totals 271 136 366 502 2,152 2,670Networks across the Generations • 77open to women, and women philosophers were also found among the Cynics,who were iconoclastic about sexism as well as everything else. In late antiquitywomen appeared among the Platonic mathematicians. In the 1600s and1700s, when European networks broke free from the monopolistic male universities,we find Anne Conway, a spiritual monist linked to the circle of HenryMore, and Catherine Cockburn, who weighed in on the side of Locke anddebated Shaftesbury and Hutcheson. In the 1800s, when women broke intothe philosophical field, they included German Idealist sympathizers such asMadame de Staël and radical materialists such as Mary Ann Evans (GeorgeEliot); in more recent times women appear in the networks alike of theanalytical school as well as the Paris existentialists and structuralists. Leadersof feminist theory—Dorothy Smith in sociology, a pupil of the ethnomethodologistHarold Garfinkel, and thus a grandpupil of the network of AlfredSchutz and the phenomenologists; Julia Kristeva, in the Tel Quel circle withDerrida—recombine the cultural capital and emotional energy of the largerintellectual networks of the preceding generation.Historians of the future, looking back at our times, will see the feministmovement as one of the forces reshaping intellectual life. But the intellectualfield is never dominated by just one faction, whether feminist or masculinist;and it is predictable that as there are increasing numbers of women in theintellectual field with the overcoming of institutional discrimination, womenwill spread throughout the various positions which make up the dynamics ofintellectual life. There is no deep philosophical battle between male and femalementalities because mentalities do not intrinsically exist. That opposition is putforward in the intellectual field today because the creative field always operatesby oppositions; our current debates are another phase of the age-old dynamic.The core of the networks that have dominated attention during the generationsof recorded history, and that totals 100 or 500 or 2,700 names, wasprivileged over all the others who did not make it into the center of attention.To speak of this as a little company of genius would be to misread thesociological point entirely. It is the networks which write the plot of this story;and the structure of network competition over the attention space, whichdetermines creativity, is focused so that the famous ideas become formulatedthrough the mouths and pens of a few individuals. To say that the communityof creative intellectuals is small is really to say that the networks are focusedat a few peaks. The struggle of human beings to situate themselves high onsuch a peak, and the conditions which make those peaks few but interlinked,are the substance of the sociology of philosophies, and of intellectual life.In this struggle almost all of us must fail. This wounds our intellectualegotism, and deflates the dream of glory, posthumous if need be, which isthe symbolic reward of intellectual work. There simply is not room in the78 • The Skeleton of Theoryattention space for more than a few to get first-rate recognition at one time,and over the flow of generations still fewer who are remembered for thelong-term influences which make them secondary reputations, let alone majorthinkers. It is the fate of almost all intellectuals to be forgotten, most of ussooner than later.Instead of taking this realization as depressing, it is possible to view it ina different light. All of us, from stars to bystanders, are part of the same fieldof forces. The network that links us together shapes and distributes our ideasand our energies. We are such stuff as Kant was made of, or Wittgenstein, orPlato; if we are sociologists, Weber and Mead are quite literally flowingthrough our minds, as Dilthey and Rickert, Wundt and James flowed throughtheirs; if mathematicians, we cannot think without thinking as part of thenetwork, however remote, which is also the mind of Pythagoras or Newton.They, and we, are constituted by the oppositions and tensions among differentparts of the network which make up the intellectual problems and hence thetopics we think about. It is the same with our contemporaries, friends andrivals alike, and with those who will come after us in the future. The stars arefew because the focus of attention in such a network is a small part of thewhole. Those persons at the centers which become the focal points for us allare not intrinsically different from ourselves. We are all constituted of the sameingredients; we make one another what we are.