CHAPTER 3£Partitioning Attention Space:The Case of Ancient GreeceCreative persons are typically linked to one another in chains, and appear ascontemporary rivals. But is there not a sense in which networks of creativitybeg the question? Another factor is presupposed that generates some creativityin the first place. The structural factors so far identified are part of the patternin which creativity occurs. Within chains over time, creativity often increases.Secondary philosophers in an earlier generation give rise to major philosophers,and the biggest stars usually have major philosophers upstream. The processis not merely the transmission of cultural capital but its intensification.Creativity involves new combinations of ideas arising from existing ones,or new ideas structured by opposition to older ones. Conflicts are the lifebloodof the intellectual world. This is rarely recognized by intellectuals in the heatof action. Their focus is on truth, and they attack their predecessors andcompatriots for failing to arrive at it. The theme recurs across the millennia,from Heraclitus to the Vienna Circle to the foundationalist controversies oftoday. Kant’s version was to complain about the sorry state of metaphysics,allegedly once queen of the sciences. This is a ritual incantation, a preparationfor battle, for there is no previous period in which metaphysics rules serenelywithout disagreements.The crucial feature of creativity is to identify an unsolved problem, and toconvince one’s peers of the importance of solving it. It is typical for intellectualsto create problems at the very moment they solve them. In India the issue ofhow to escape from the bonds of karma did not exist until the Buddhistsproposed a means of escape. Epicurus made fear of the gods an issue at thesame time that he propounded a solution to these fears. Kant discovered thatscience was threatened when he announced a Copernican revolution to endthe threat.A single philosopher in isolation rarely develops a new issue or a new wayof resolving it; this usually happens to two or more philosophers in the samegeneration but rival lineages. The emergence of new problems is part of the80transformation of the whole intellectual problem space. The underlying dynamicis a struggle over intellectual territory of limited size. Creativity occursboth as this space opens up and as it closes down; the result is two kinds ofintellectual innovation, by opposition and by synthesis.The Intellectual Law of Small NumbersThe structure of intellectual life is governed by a principle: the number ofactive schools of thought which reproduce themselves for more than one ortwo generations in an argumentative community is on the order of three tosix. There is a strong lower limit; creativity can scarcely occur without rivalpositions, and almost always in any creative period there are at least three.There is also an upper limit; whenever there are more than about four to sixdistinct positions, most of them are not propagated across subsequent generations.The principle is dynamic over time. Positions appear and disappear, growstronger and weaker in adherents. The law of small numbers holds sway amidthe flux. Strong positions (those which have dominant external support),subdivide in subsequent generations into as many as four or five factions. Onthe other side, weak positions (those that have a poor or declining externalbase) disappear, or amalgamate into others by syncretisms or syntheses. Wemay add a corollary: a second reason why positions become weak is that theentire attention space becomes overcrowded, violating the upper limits of thelaw of small numbers. This too is an incentive to reduce the number ofpositions by synthesis.Why should this pattern exist? There are several aspects to the question.One is structural: Why should the number of self-sustaining groups be fromthree to six? There is also the dynamic issue: Why do schools rise and fall?Combining the two issues, When schools do rise and fall, why do they split oramalgamate?The structural question has already been partially answered. There is alower limit because intellectual creativity is a conflict process. If there is anycreativity at all, there must be an organizational basis in the intellectual worldsuch that there are at least two positions, and in fact there are usually atleast three. If there is freedom to have more than one position, a third at leastalways seems available; a plague on both houses is always a viable intellectualstrategy.1The upper limit also derives from the structure of conflict. Even thoughnew positions are largely structured by the negation of existing positions, anyindividual philosopher needs allies if his or her position is to be transmittedto anyone else and propagated across generations. Hence, proliferation of newPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 81positions above the level at which groups can still be relatively large and visible(i.e., above about six) is self-defeating. This does not mean that there cannotbe periods when positions proliferate to very large numbers. The number gotdangerously high in Plato’s generation in Greece, when in addition to theAcademy there were also the schools of Megara, Cyrene, Elis, Abdera, Cyzicus,the emerging Skeptic movement, Isocrates’ school of rhetoric, and the remnantsof the Pythagoreans. But most of these groups dropped out within ageneration or two, leaving a structural limit of three to six. Conflict is limitedby itself.Why then do lineages appear in the first place, some proving successful,some proliferating, others declining? Because of changing external conditionsof social life which provide material bases for intellectuals to work and publicizethemselves. That is why, although ideas do not reduce to surroundingsocial conditions, nevertheless large-scale political and economic changes indirectlyset off periods of intellectual change. We will trace both levels in atwo-step process of social causality: the inner splits and alliances which takeplace as networks maneuver under the law of small numbers; and the outerchanges in the material base, which trigger periods of inner realignment.The Forming of an Argumentative Networkand the Launching of Greek PhilosophyLook now at the shifting structure of Greek philosophy. The earliest philosophygradually crystallizes out of a plethora of political “wise men” and questionersof the traditional religious beliefs in the generations around 600 b.c.e. Hereexternal conditions are prominent: the democratic revolution and politicalreforms, the spread of literacy, and their effect in undermining the religiouspractices connected with traditional political life.2 A crucial step follows: anintellectual community separates out by turning toward its own topics andstandards of competition. The initial rounds of discussion are cosmological.Anthropomorphic deities once defined the categories of the natural world; thesocial conditions which undermined the old religious cults now open a newargument space. Into this vacuum step the first secular intellectuals. Thecommunity concerned with the topics of proto-philosophy begins to formamong cosmological poets such as Alcman (late 600s) or even Hesiod (700s),introducing order into the disparate religious myths, depicting the rise of thecosmos as a genealogy of deities. In the generation of Pherecydes and Xenophanes,intellectuals reflectively distance themselves from the myths by reinterpretingor criticizing. Thales, later singled out as the “first philosopher” becausehe expressly recognizes the shifting of old cultural capital into a newproblem space, declares that “all things are full of gods,” and goes on to in-82 • The Skeleton of Theoryterpret them counter-anthropomorphically as ultimate constituents of nature.Heraclitus, who as a priest is a last remnant of the old pre-philosophical base,continues this play with concepts on the border of the secular and the divineas late as three generations into the secular intellectual community.The first burst of creativity occurs in rivalry, not in unity. There areseveral candidates for the basic elements: the anthropomorphic gods themselves;various physical elements as prime arche, or a non-physical elementsuch as the apeiron; the “unbounded” of Anaximander; or the numbers of thePythagoreans, at first conceived as quasi-physical entities like the collectionsof pebbles used for calculation.3 Personal lineages begin to appear from oneleader to the next across the generations. We see three lineages in Figure 3.1,FIGURE 3.1. FORMING THE NETWORK OF GREEK PHILOSOPHERS,600–465 B.C.E.Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 83PHILOSOPHICAL SCHOOLS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN REGIONderiving from Thales; from Pherecydes, possibly connecting with the “sage”Pittacus (2 in the key); and from Xenophanes.This activity took place in what must have been a self-conscious community.Miletus, the largest city and major trading port on the Ionian coast, wasonly 20 miles from the island of Samos, where Pythagoras originated; Pherecydeswas from Leros, an island 40 miles off Miletus; Heraclitus at Ephesus wasin the next city north of Miletus, 30 miles away; Xenophanes at Colophonwas another 15 miles inland, a day’s journey from Ephesus; slightly farther upthe coast was Clazomenae (home of Anaxagoras), with Sardis (home of thecosmological poet Alcman, who later migrated to Sparta) 20 miles inland. Eventhe systematizers of mythology were from this region: Homer is reputed tohave lived (or at least his tradition was perpetuated) at Smyrna, a day’s sail(20 miles) up the coast from Clazomenae, and Cyme, the home of Hesiod’sfather, was another 30 miles north.4 Unquestionably the rival “cosmologists”knew about one another. In this network of towns, the bigger ones 30,000 to65,000 in population, with a good deal of coastal travel, and intellectual lifecarried on in public recitations, it is unlikely that there would not have beenmuch personal contact.5 A competitive community of Ionian intellectuals existed,from the poets of around 700 b.c.e. onward, down through the nexthalf-dozen generations.External political forces broke up this local structure in the late 500s.Xenophanes left in the Persian conquest of Ionia in 545 (DSB, 1981: 14:536),Pythagoras perhaps 15 years later. The shift in philosophy that came with themove to Magna Graecia is not a matter of geographical determinism. The“Italian” or “Eleatic” schools were continuations of the Ionian networks; the“Italian” (actually Sicilian) Empedocles produced an eclectic combination fourelementscheme (earth, air, fire, water) by recombining the material elementsof Ionian cultural capital.6 What was occurring was the crystallization of a newset of oppositions in the intellectual world. The element-seekers had becometoo numerous, with nothing to give precedence to one position or another.Empedocles’ eclectic combination represents the kind of alliance on the materialelement front one might expect from the law of small numbers. In thisEmpedocles was extremely successful, boiling down the Ionian philosophies toa piece of cultural capital that was to prove enormously resilient over the nexttwo thousand years.A new opposition emerged against the whole movement of element-seeking.Characteristically, there was a two-pronged attack in the same generation.Heraclitus moved toward disowning the concrete level entirely; the constituentsof the universe consist instead of a process, the flux, and also of a structureregulating and patterning it, the logos. Heraclitus was the first to break throughand recognize a higher level of abstraction. The Pythagoreans, with theirPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 85doctrine of number, might seem to present a parallel, but it is doubtful thatthe generation of Pythagoras himself viewed numbers in other than concreteterms; the doctrine of the numerical Forms is not clearly visible until fourgenerations later, with Plato, although it may have emerged in the Pythagoreanschool itself in the intervening period.Within Heraclitus’ lifetime, Parmenides also crossed the border to a higherlevel of philosophical abstraction. His famous monism, based on logical argumentsthat Being cannot be itself if it admits of differentiation or change, isclearly a response to the element theories, and likely to Heraclitus as well(Guthrie, 1961–1982: 2:23–24). With this, the internal structure of the intellectualcommunity was well launched on its autonomous path. Parmenidesposed a puzzle—speaking more strictly, a deep trouble—for intellectuals towork upon. He thereby carved out a distinctive space that no longer owedanything to popular religious conceptions. Henceforward, when the borderbetween philosophy and religion became salient, the philosophers would havetheir own autonomous contribution to make, and indeed could generate theirown philosophical religions. Heraclitus too, with his concept of logos, providedan abstract tool that could be bent to many uses in this internal struggle withinthe intellectual world.External factors impinged again on this increasingly complex intellectualcommunity. The next two generations saw further democratic revolutions, thegeopolitical upheavals of the Persian wars and their aftermath of Athenianimperialism. These events sent ambassadors and refugees traveling around theGreek world. In this milieu appeared traveling Sophists, typically men not aswell based in private fortunes and political position as the earlier pre-Socratics.The search for livelihood was one impetus for the emergence of education forfees, and hence for the rise of the professional teacher and the organized school(Kerford, 1981). Political issues of the surrounding social milieu are prominentin the Sophists’ doctrines, especially their discussions of nomos (law, custom)versus physis (nature), and of the source of moral and legal obligation. TheSophists became famous for teaching how to argue on either side of a question,making a living by selling a practical skill useful to citizens in the participatorylaw courts of the democratic city-states. But the Sophists were also heirs tointernal developments in the intellectual community. They argued on the levelof abstract principles, not concrete cases, and religious reifications for themwere a thing of the past. Part of their shocking effect on laypeople was that theywere an intellectual avant-garde; they attracted the usual hostility of laypersonswhose loyalty was attached to reified sacred objects, directed against cosmopolitansoperating at a higher level of abstraction.The Sophists carved out a new stance within the intellectual field. This wasthe technique of deliberately playing at paradoxes, of confronting other intel-86 • The Skeleton of Theorylectual positions with inconsistencies generated by a more abstract analysis.The cultural capital here came originally from Heraclitus’ and Parmenides’breakthroughs, now shorn of ontological content. Heraclitus’ doctrine wasgenerally taken to consist of the flux, ignoring the logos which holds swayabove it. Parmenides was regarded as the source of paradoxical statementsabout the impossibility of change. The two great opposites were united inarguing for the impossibility of an uncontradictory worldview. Parmenidesdirectly taught the Sophists’ network, while Heracliteans were noisy at Ephesuswith their flaunted contradictions. One of their number, Cratylus, was reputedto have refused to speak at all, and could only gesture, to avoid contradictinghimself (Guthrie, 1961–1982: 2:358); he shows up at Athens at the time ofSocrates and Plato. This space in the intellectual lineup would be filled by theMegarians and the Skeptics long after the external political conditions whichfirst made the Sophists possible had disappeared.Down to the generation of Socrates, there are many contenders for intellectualattention, but essentially four positions maintain themselves longitudinally.The element-seekers divide into three long-standing schools: the atomists,who hold a strongly materialist stance and counter the arguments of Parmenideswith a view of combinations of hard elements of Being moving in thevoid; at the other end, the Pythagoreans, who increasingly have moved to aconception of Number as an abstraction above the material level; in the middle,Empedocles’ four-element doctrine is carried on especially in the schools ofmedicine in the theory of the four humors. The fourth position is that ofparadoxing and relativism, a turf which includes the nature of argument itself,and some self-consciousness about the nature of logic and abstractions. Inshort, three substantive positions, and a fourth as “plague on all houses.”In the network (Figure 3.2) Socrates is a pivot; he is connected with virtuallyevery chain prior to his time, often by debate, and from him flow most of theorganized schools of the next generation. This network centrality is the sourceof his fame. Substantively I believe Socrates’ originality is overrated. Contemporaryaccounts—especially that of Aristophanes, and apparently other dramatists(Guthrie, 1961–1982: 3:40)—depict him as another fast-talking exponentof the physical cosmologies, another member of the lineage of Anaxagoras;when he was condemned to death in 399 b.c.e. for impiety against literalistreligion, it was on much the same charge as that on which Anaxagoras wasexpelled from Athens around 430. What is transmitted in the Platonic dialoguesis to a large extent Plato’s own sophistication about epistemology, andthe theory of Forms seems to be Plato’s generalization of Pythagorean numberphilosophy.Nevertheless, if Socrates is only an emblem, he represents a crucial changein the structure of intellectual networks. What “Socrates” did (if in combina-Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 87tion with “Plato”) was to recombine intellectual stances: where the Sophistshad worked this material from the relativistic (and politically liberal) side,Socrates/Plato combined it with the transcendent ontology that came from thePythagoreans, and fortified it by grappling with the ontological puzzle bequeathedby Parmenides. Relativism and dialectic still anchor this position: inPlato, it is that opposition by which the doctrine of Forms defines itself. InSocrates, it is more likely that the dialectic itself remains central; though hehad ties to wealthy conservative patrons (and did not have to live the life ofcommercial scrambling for which he scorned his Sophist rivals), he seems tohave balanced the possibility of eternal truths and standards against the argumentsof relativism. Most of Socrates’ offshoots in the next generation wouldtake some portion of the relativistic turf, especially Euclides at Megara, whoemphasized the intellectual side as logic; and Antisthenes, who taught thatFIGURE 3.2. CENTRALIZATION OF THE GREEK NETWORK INATHENS, 465–365 B.C.E.88 • The Skeleton of Theorydistrust of intellectual positions should be a lived commitment, thus giving riseto Cynicism. We should also include Isocrates, another pupil of Socrates (andof the Sophist and rhetorician Gorgias), who repudiated philosophy entirelyand set up a fee-taking educational system based on rhetoric alone. Isocratesis a Sophist gone respectable; for him arguing is just a technique, with no claimsfor or against truth or political significance per se.For those followers who stayed within philosophy, Socrates’ position canbe regarded as upping the ante in the relativistic position; instead of the “naivedialectic” of the Sophists, Socrates and such followers as Euclides of Megaraand Plato were now explicitly conscious of dialectic argument about thedialectic itself. It would be wrong to conclude that the intellectual field wascompletely taken over by dialectic and its higher forms, epistemology and valuetheory. Socrates’ most important contemporary was Democritus, who producedthe most comprehensive ontology yet, and on the materialist side.Structurally, Democritus and Socrates divide the field between rival ways ofdoing philosophy: the one a systematizer of prior ontological reflection (includingapparently a good deal of mathematics from the Pythagoreans andelsewhere); the other an aggressive progenitor of a method for opening up newintellectual problems.How Long Do Organized Schools Last?What follows is obvious: we should look at the social conditions surroundingPlato and Aristotle, and perhaps at the founding of the Epicurean and Stoicschools, the twilight generation in which classic philosophy begins to fade.Thereafter, for readers schooled in the Western philosophical tradition, it istempting to tune out until philosophy reawakens a millennium or more later.Plato and Aristotle are the great classics, and the maneuvers of the myriadschools which accompanied them, virtually down to the end of Greco-Romanantiquity, are historical marginalia.The process of constituting a “classic” cannot be understood in this way.It was rather remote posterity that elevated Plato and Aristotle to the virtualexclusion of all others. Their elevation seems particularly fickle if we focus ontheir doctrines rather than merely their names. Aristotle’s school moved awayfrom his position virtually from the time of his death, and then in a fewgenerations the school itself collapsed; thereafter, throughout antiquity andmuch of the Islamic and early Christian Middle Ages, “Aristotelean” philosophywas seen very piecemeal, distorted into a kind of Idealism. It was onlywith Averroës and his influence in Christendom around 1250 that Aristotlebecame “The Philosopher” familiar from our education. “Plato” was morecontinuously a famous name, but his Academy shifted the contents taughtPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 89under it, changing drastically several times between emanationist religion andskepticism. The epistemological sharpness of the Platonic dialogues whichmoderns admire is a selective interpretation, and by no means the dominantone in the networks that succeeded Plato.It is crucial to pursue these networks throughout antiquity, and not onlyfor the sake of contrast, of highlighting the peaks against the valleys, andbecause of the premonition that the Hellenistic era better holds up the mirrorto our own times than does the Golden Age of the founders. The essence ofphilosophical creativity lies not in the genius of individuals but in the structuralrealignments which take place under the law of small numbers. Here weconfront an unanswered question: If expansion and contraction in the numberof intellectual lineages structure the pattern of creativity, what explains theexistence of the lineages themselves?Schools of thought, grounded in intergenerational network lineages, arebest able to reproduce themselves when they are based in organizations withmaterial property and a hierarchy of offices. Shifts in this hard organizationalbackbone set off the realignments which in turn structure intellectual spaceunder the law of small numbers. To demonstrate, let us take an overview ofthe pattern of organized schools across the entire Greco-Roman period (seeFigure 3.3).The first organized school in Greece was the Pythagorean brotherhood.This was a secret society, with internal ranks and religious practices (DSB,1981: 11:219–220; Guthrie, 1961–1982: 1:173–181; Burkert, 1972). It alsohad a material reality, with its own buildings, such as the citadels in Crotona,Metapontum, and Locri in southern Italy (see Map 1). In this early phase,Pythagoras’ own active lifetime (around 530–520 b.c.e.) and the next twogenerations, the brotherhood was explicitly political, ruling with the supportof, and probably drawing membership from, the local aristocracy. The democraticrebellion which swept Magna Graecia around 450 b.c.e. burned theirmeetinghouses. The Pythagoreans withdrew to Tarentum, which was still heldunder Archytas’ leadership when Plato visited him around 390 and again in365 (DSB, 1981: 11:24–29). Others returned to the Greek mainland, wherein Plato’s day there was a Pythagorean center in Phlius, a small town in thePeloponnesus. In the late 400s Pythagoreans were out of politics and circulatingin general intellectual life; Philolaus at Thebes was reputed to have publishedtheir secret doctrines (Guthrie, 1961–1982: 1:155).7 The major intellectualinnovations of the school, especially its discoveries in mathematics, apparentlytook place during this generation. By 350 the school had disappeared.Around 470 another organized school seems to have existed in Abdera,comprising a succession of teachers from Leucippus and Democritus onwards(Guthrie, 1961–1982: 2:382). This too seems to have been more of a ritual90 • The Skeleton of Theorybrotherhood than a fee-taking school. It carried on for five generations downto around 330, including a branch at its mother city—Abdera being a colony—Teos, off the Ionian coast. Nausiphanes, teaching at Teos, connected Epicurusto this school.Just after 400 b.c.e., the intellectual community discovered the school asan institutional structure that can be deliberately created. There was a hugeoutpouring of foundations, leading to a crisis in the attention space because itoverflowed the limits of the law of small numbers. The schools were modeled,in part, on the Pythagoreans, as a religious fraternity living in common onFIGURE 3.3. ORGANIZED SCHOOLS OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY,600 B.C.E.–100 C.E.Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 91endowed property. In another respect, these were the first schools of highereducation, beyond the level of the elementary schooling of the youth cohortof the city-state, the ephebes who went through athletic and military drilltogether, along with some training in music and poetry (Marrou, 1964). Thephilosophical schools put on a formal and material foundation the commercialeducation in advanced subjects which the Sophists had pioneered.The Academy, founded around 380 in Athens, was originally a park andpublic gymnasium outside the city; Plato subsequently purchased a garden andbuilt houses for lodging students and visitors (DSB, 1981: 11:27). Memberstook their meals in common (following Pythagorean precedent) and wereexpected to contribute financially according to their means. Plato nominatedhis successor; subsequently the scholarch was elected. The organization waslegally recognized as a religious fraternity dedicated to the Muses and thus asa property-conveying unit. The organization of the other schools founded atthis time is less well known. There were famous schools at Megara, a day’sjourney from Athens; at Elis, near the site of the Olympic games in thenorthwest Peloponnesus (120 miles from Athens); more remotely, at the Greekcolony of Cyrene on the African coast; and at Cyzicus, a colony of Miletus,on the Propontus (Sea of Marmara) in Asia Minor.A different type of school was founded at the same time: Isocrates, likevirtually all the other founders a pupil of Socrates, founded in Athens the firstschool of rhetoric (Marrou, 1964: 119–136, 267–281). Isocrates’ school becamethe model for the dominant form of higher education in the Greek andRoman world, eclipsing in numbers the schools of philosophy. For centuriesthereafter rhetoricians and philosophers were professional rivals over the territoryof higher education (Marrou, 1964: 287–290). Another institutionaldevelopment more closely tied to philosophy had taken place a generationearlier (in the late 400s), when Hippocrates founded his school of medicine onthe island of Cos at the southeast corner of the Ionian coast, a reform movementat the traditional shamanistic medical center of the Asclepiads. Thefollowers or associates of Hippocrates apparently soon split, with a rivalmedical school appearing at Cnidus, the neighboring port on the mainland(DSB, 1981: 6:422–424). Now the intellectual field was beginning to divide inyet another dimension than the rivalries under the law of small numbers:rhetoric and medicine eventually became professional specialties in their ownright, fields of attention increasingly cut off from philosophy. But in thefounding generations, these disciplines added to the struggle within the centralattention space, aggravating the crisis of overcrowding. The medical schoolswere carriers of some of the main philosophical positions; and the rhetoriciansoverlapped with the activities of Aristotle’s school, as Aristotle played off theirconcepts in a crucial component of his philosophical synthesis.92 • The Skeleton of TheoryDuring the following generations, the crisis of the law of small numberscame to a head. The material bases of intellectual life drastically reorganized.Most of the schools which branched off from Socrates flourished for two orthree generations and then died. The school at Elis was moved, in the thirdgeneration, by Menedemus to his home Eretria (on the island of Euboea,northeast of Athens) before it disappeared, and the school at Cyrene split intothree branches in its third generation (Reale, 1985: 55–56, 39–42). The headof one branch, Theodorus “the atheist,” was expelled from Cyrene, latergarnered political support from the Ptolemys at Alexandria, and returned intriumph. The head of another branch was prohibited from lecturing by Ptolemybecause his doctrine was moving students to commit suicide. The school atMegara, less melodramatic but sophisticated in logic, similarly flourished forthree generations and then disappeared. Eudoxus’ school at Cyzicus, whichmaintained visiting ties with the Academy, moved to Cnidus, apparently inresponse to Persian military advances; it produced a good deal of creativity,especially in mathematics and astronomy, but lapsed within two generations(DSB, 1981: 4:465–467). It was during this period, too, that the Pythagoreansand the Abdera school came to an end. We can add the two Hippocraticmedical schools to the list of casualties.8In the generations just before and after 300 b.c.e., there was a wave ofreorganization. So many schools had died out that there was room for newones to form by recombining their cultural capital. Aristotle founded hisLyceum in Athens, in imitation of the Academy, in 335. Epicurus founded hisGarden community in 307, Zeno of Citium his Stoic school (after the Stoa, or“Porch,” in Athens where he lectured), about 302. Of the older schools, onlythe Academy survived.These four Athenian schools dominated intellectual life for two centuries.Now stability sets in, comfortably within the law of small numbers. InFigure 3.3 we see one other organized school, the Museum and Library atAlexandria. But this was no doctrinal rival to the four philosophies. Thenetworks headquartered at Athens maintained overseas branches. The Peripateticsand Stoics had strong ties at Alexandria. The founding of the Museumand Library occurred under the influence of Demetrius of Phalerum, a pupilof Theophrastus and friend of Aristotle. Rivalry over geopolitical prestige wasa motivating factor, while the successors to Alexander partitioned his empire.9Neither the Library nor the Museum was a teaching institution, thus leavingthe Athens schools in command. But instruction in private schools also existedat Alexandria, and after the breakup of the Athens schools around 50 b.c.e.,the syncretizing philosophies seem to have been based there to a considerableextent, down through 500 c.e. The Epicureans, too, had branches, but theintellectual leadership was firmly at Athens. Branch communities receivedPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 93directions by letter from the headquarters, and were expected to send contributions.10The Peripatos had the rockiest history. The school weathered a wave ofanti-Macedonian sentiment after the death of its patron Alexander the Greatin 323, and prospered under Theophrastus. At Theophrastus’ death, his manuscriptsand those of Aristotle were removed to private hands in Skepsis, a smallcity in Asia Minor, possibly as the result of hard feelings over the successionof Strato as scholarch (Guthrie, 1961–1982: 6:59). Although the school’sdoctrine changed at that time, the school itself survived for six more generations.But after 100 b.c.e., we hear of no more scholarchs of the Peripatos.11The end point for all the Athenian schools came shortly after 100 b.c.e.,under the external shock of the Roman conquest.12 Even earlier, the Stoicschool was coming loose from its Athenian base. A library was founded atPergamum around 190 b.c.e. by the Attilid kings in explicit rivalry with thePtolemys in Egypt; another was created at Rhodes by around 100 (OCCL,1937: 64). Panaetius first studied at the Library at Pergamum under its head,Crates the Stoic, around 165 (EP, 1967: 6:22). In the first generation after 100b.c.e., Posidonius made the Stoic school at Rhodes far more famous than theschool at Athens, where he himself had studied under Panaetius (Reale, 1985:434). But after Posidonius, the Rhodes school lapsed, and the Stoa in Athensis heard from no more.With each episode of change in the material base comes a new partitioningof intellectual space. One can readily see in Figure 3.3 the opening up of a fieldof intellectual organizations which took place around 400 b.c.e.; then a rearrangementof schools around 300, when most of the seven to nine schoolsexisting at that time disappeared and were replaced by three or four others.13Organizational turning points are intellectual turning points as well. Long-lastingschools such as the Academy and the Peripatos shifted their doctrines eachtime in response to realignments of the entire field. Another big period ofdoctrinal shift occurred at the organizational turning point 100–50 b.c.e.,when the formal schools were replaced by purely personal followings ofphilosophers.Moreover, intellectual space can be filled by more than just formal organizations.Personal networks of masters, pupils, and compatriots are typicallychanneled within formal schools when these exist. The organizational patternsummarized in Figure 3.3 is reflected on the network level in Figures 3.2through 3.5. The amount of fractionation in the attention space sometimesexceeds the numbers of formal schools that I have enumerated, and the splittingof informal networks also contributed to straining the law of small numbers.Informal networks dominated among most pre-Socratics; there was no actualschool at Miletus, nor in my opinion at Elea or in Sicily. Most of these intel-94 • The Skeleton of Theorylectuals were involved in politics and made their living from their private fortunes,in political office, or by making speeches or practicing medicine.14 TheSophists continued this pattern, except that some of them, like Protagoras orGorgias, became notorious for taking pupils for pay, which was regarded inaristocratic circles as a shocking innovation.15 Socrates, who was not so verydifferent from the other Sophists in his intellectual relationships, was veryself-consciously respectable in that he lived off his wealthier friends as a guest;this same relationship of patron to client, glossed as his “amicus,” was theprestigious form of intellectual support in Roman times as well (Rawson, 1985:67). Isocrates’ school set the model for the commercialized fee-taking pattern,which seems to have become respectable in Hellenistic times but was downgradedagain for a while with the Roman conquest. By around 200 c.e., whenofficial salaried positions were established for professors of rhetoric or philosophy,or for a municipal doctor, these too were considered respectable, sincethey did not involve selling one’s services for fees (Jones, [1964] 1986: 1012–13; cf. Rawson, 1985: 170–171).Although there are only two organized schools among the pre-Socratics,neither reaching back much before 500 b.c.e., Figure 3.2 shows some five orsix personal chains, already reaching the limits of the law of small numbers.The school of Abdera (Figure 3.3) begins soon after the Miletus chain leavesoff; one might say the intellectual “space” for a naturalist or materialistposition was continuously filled by these two interrupted chains (if indeed therewas no actual contact between them, as implied in the report that Leucippuswas a native of Miletus). Other chains appear in the generations after 500,involving Heraclitus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Protagoras, and Anaxagoras.The generation around 400 which sees the proliferation of organizedschools—Megarian, Cyrenaic, Academic, and so on—is in fact even morecrowded (Figure 3.4). The Cynics appear at this time, prefigured by Antisthenesand then epitomized by Diogenes of Sinope. This was far from being anorganized school; indeed it might even be called an anti-school, with itsdoctrine of avoiding material possessions and social responsibilities of anykind. The Cynic movement adds to the pattern of intellectual rivalries of the300s c.e.; for all its maverick qualities, it had the same life span as most ofthe other “minor” Socratic schools. Diogenes’ follower Crates was the last“pure” Cynic. The whole movement covered only three generations, fromAntisthenes, who lived on the whole a conventional lifestyle; through Diogenes,who radicalized the position from an intellectual one to a total commitmentas a way of life; ending with Crates and his contemporaries. Other followersturned the Cynic stance into a formula for popular literature, writing plays,diatribes, and satires, which provided a basis of material support (Reale, 1985:35–37). Cynicism caught the public eye more than any other philosophicalPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 95FIGURE 3.4. PROLIFERATION AND RECOMBINATION OF THEGREEK SCHOOLS, 400–200 B.C.E.96 • The Skeleton of Theoryposition by its total commitment to living its doctrine, and the term “philosopher”conjured up more than anything else the image of the black-robed figurepreaching in the streets, contemptuous of worldly things. Nevertheless, themovement disappeared around 300 b.c.e., the same time as most of its rivals.The Skeptics, too, were a movement rather than a school. Again there wereforerunners, before the famous expositor Pyrrho. The style of paradox makinghad been in the air ever since the followers of Heraclitus and of Parmenidesaround 450 b.c.e. The Megarian school of logicians incorporated many skepticalthemes. Pyrrho seems most notable for making skepticism a full-fledgedcommitment; he allegedly refused to choose between alternatives, even in dailylife, and was guided about by friends to keep him from hurting himself (D.L.,1925: ix, 61; cf. Frede, 1987: 181–183). Basing himself on a different intellectualcontent, he nevertheless ended up in practice in much the same positionas the Cynics. His disciple Timon systematized the doctrine but did not attemptto live it. There were no more independent Skeptics in the following generation;instead, skepticism was taken over by one of the organized schools, theAcademics, in the revolution carried out by Arcesilaus.Adding the informal lineages to the formal schools reinforces the generalpattern. They further heightened the competition for intellectual space in the300s b.c.e., lasted for a few generations, and disappeared or amalgamated intothe small number of factions which survived.Small Numbers Crisis and the Creativityof the Post-Socratic GenerationThe three generations from Socrates’ students down through 300 b.c.e. werea time of structural crisis for the philosophical community. The law of smallnumbers was being seriously violated. At the outset, a new organizational formcame into existence. Half a dozen formally organized schools rushed into thisnew space, while there were two older schools still operating (the Pythagoreanand the Abderan); in addition, there appeared two lifestyle movements, unorganizedanti-schools so to speak: Skeptics and Cynics. The new schools all hadan initial burst of creativity, intellectual energy stirred up by the openingstructural opportunities. They divided the cultural capital already available byapplying it in divergent directions and elaborating explicitly against one another.Euclides and the Megarian school appropriated Parmenides’ metaphysicsin a fairly pure form. They declared that Being is always unitary and “the solegood is that which is always one and alike and the same” (Reale, 1987:281–282, 374). Euclides ethicized Eleatic metaphysics while explicitly groundingSocrates’ ethical standards in an objective ontology. This was roughly thePartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 97same turf that Plato staked out; hence it is not surprising to find the Megarianschool polemicizing against Plato for breaking up pure Being into a pluralityof Ideas, and later against Aristotle for his conception of potentiality as anadditional dimension of Being. Across the next two generations, the Megarianschool maintained a good deal of prominence. It backed away from the Eleaticmetaphysics and placed increasing emphasis on developing formal logic andon the famous debating skills of members such as Stilpo and Eubulides, whowas known as a paradoxer, and whose followers were known as Eristics fortheir contentiousness. This kept the Megarians in the public eye, but alsomoved them increasingly onto the same turf as the Skeptics and Cynics; latein the century they amalgamated with the Cynics and eventually with theStoics.Antisthenes, taking the other direction, played up the dialectical side ofSocrates’ method, with a special emphasis on opposing other schools ofthought. He seems to have been a materialist, declaring against Plato that onlythe bodily exists; he held that pain is a good thing, citing hero stories of thedeeds of Heracles (Reale, 1987: 367–370)—thus taking the opposite side fromthe hedonistic school of Aristippus. He also scorned intellectual debate byarguing that it is impossible for two men to contradict each other. Whether ornot Diogenes was Antisthenes’ pupil—Antisthenes rejected the practice, nowfollowed by his rivals, of taking formal pupils—Diogenes went on to fill thisslot in the intellectual world by making himself an exemplar of anti-conventionalityin every respect. Diogenes took up the sophisticated position of beingan intellectual’s anti-intellectual, a mocker of all. His followers, to the extentthat they were able to sustain themselves, did so by institutionalizing mockeryas a literary form.The Skeptics we have already noted. In some respects Pyrrho and Timonduplicated the turf that the Megarian logicians were already occupying, whilejettisoning any positive doctrine such as Eleatic metaphysics; they made skepticismnot just an epistemological argument but a lifestyle, which in turnbrought them onto Cynic territory. It is not surprising that all three of thesenetwork lineages were unstable, though the core intellectual doctrine of skepticismwas to have a long history in a series of new homes.In the long run of the intellectual community, these schools became “minor”;in their day, however, they attracted the most attention of all. Theirchosen turf overlapped most closely with lay concerns, and personalities suchas Antisthenes, Diogenes, Crates, and Pyrrho dramatized themselves in thepublic eye.16 This was also true of the famous Aristippus and his Cyrenaicschool. Aristippus took the subjectivist line that only feelings exist for us; andhe pushed this to an ethical conclusion, that the individual could control hisown happiness. Aristippus was admired, like Socrates, for his gay serenity. The98 • The Skeleton of TheoryCyrenaics elaborated the intellectual position of hedonism, along with the idealof the sage immune to worldly vicissitudes. This position was fraught withinner conflicts; but it was precisely these conflicts that contributed to theintellectual vitality of the school over the next several generations (Reale, 1987:40–43, 384–386). Hegesias argued that the goal of life is pleasure, but that itis rarely attainable; therefore life is indifferent, and suicide is acceptable. Hisrivals opposed this scandalous doctrine with other sources of happiness in thisworld where pleasures are few and fleeting. Theodoris favored the innercondition of joy based on wisdom, defined as acting without regard to lawsor conventions, indifferent even to torture and death. These dramatic argumentsattracted a good deal of attention. They also had the effect of movingthe Cyrenaics onto the same turf as the Cynics; after Hegesias, Anneceris, andTheodorus, the Cyrenaic school disappeared, and the technical core of itshedonistic ethics was appropriated by the Epicureans.Holding a position between the other schools was Phaedo’s at Elis. Advocatinga doctrine of detachment, it was kept intellectually alive by controversieswith other schools; in its final generation, Menedemus played against theMegarian doctrine of an unchanging good (also shared by other schools) byarguing that the good is wholly in the mind (Reale, 1987: 287–288).Subject to overcrowding under the law of small numbers, some of theseschools were bound to be short-lived. Against this background of competingschools, Plato and Aristotle put together the intellectual stances that were towin long-term eminence. Plato differs from the others, partly in breadth, andin holding to a core of serious intellectual activity for its own sake. He avoidedthe flamboyant lifestyle movements for a relatively conventional practice. Notthat he was without political or religious projects; but discussion of these didnot call for any radical dropping out from ordinary duties, powers, or property.In any case, competition for attention on that side of the field was alreadyintense. As long as the relativistic dialectical schools were active, the Academytook the opposite pole, defending transcendent truths. Plato with his wideintellectual contacts drew every resource into defense of this position. Thefinal collapse of the Pythagoreans in his own generation left him free toappropriate their doctrines, including mathematics as an exemplar of Forms,and (apparently) also their doctrine of transmigration, which Plato elaboratedinto a speculative basis for the soul’s recollection of eternal Forms known ina prior life.17Plato inherited the Pythagoreans’ slot in the intellectual field, but he wasnot alone in exploiting their patrimony. The Pythagoreans had already in thegeneration around 430–400 b.c.e. released their mathematics into public circulation;and their puzzles such as squaring the circle encouraged a takeoff ofmathematical activity which had considerably overlapped the community ofPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 99Sophists (Heath, [1921] 1981: 1:220–231; Fowler, 1987: 294–308). Not onlyPlato but Eudoxus as well built on this milieu; Eudoxus’ school at Cyzicus wasfamous above all as a school of mathematics and astronomy. But it was alsoa full-fledged philosophical school, propounding the doctrine of Ideas in muchthe same form as Plato (Reale, 1985: 63–64; DSB, 1981: 4:465–467), whilediverging in ethics by holding a hedonistic doctrine that brought the schoolcloser to the Cyrenaics. Eudoxus’ school was the prime center of mathematicalcreativity in its day; Plato acquired some of the prestige of mathematics bydrawing in individual mathematicians such as Theaetetus, Philip of Opus, andHeraclides Ponticus, and having Eudoxus himself visit the Academy with hisfollowers to teach the more advanced subjects.This source of rivalry soon collapsed; the Cyzicus school moved and thendisappeared, enriching the next generation of the Academy with mathematicians.It is possible that there was a struggle at Cyzicus itself between twofactions; we know of an early follower of Epicurus who had apparentlyconverted from the Cyzicus mathematical school, and of Epicurean chargeswhich circulated at that time implying at least one of the factions had attachedits astronomy to Babylonian star worship (Rist, 1972: 7). At about this time,Plato’s third-generation successor as head of the Academy (ca. 340–314 b.c.e.),Xenocrates, promoted star worship for a while, making astronomy a sacredpractice attached to demonology (Dillon, 1977: 24–38; Cumont, [1912] 1960:29–30). The general drift seems clear: the Cyzicus school and the Academymore or less divided the same turf for a generation, leaving Plato leeway toexperiment with other intellectual strands. When the Cyzicus school collapsed,its doctrines became predominant at the Academy, and mathematics wasexalted as the major form of knowledge. Speusippus, Plato’s successor in 348b.c.e., placed all emphasis on supra-sensible reality, and hence on numbers asthe first principles of the world (Guthrie, 1961–1982, 5:459–461).The mathematicians’ takeover had the further consequence that Aristotlesplit off to establish his own school. Aristotle developed the doctrine that numbersare inessential, since mathematics contributes nothing to understandingmovement and change. Since a mathematics of change eventually proved possible,one should say that Aristotle was not interested in encouraging a mathematicsalong these lines; his structural motivation was to break with themathematical faction, representing the side of the Academy that held out fornon-mathematical pursuits.18 Aristotle seems to have taken the empirical researcherswith him; first on his biological expeditions around the Aegean, andlater into his rival foundation at Athens.The Academy in its first generation appears to have been rather non-doctrinaire.Not only did Plato explore a diversity of positions, as indicated in therange of his own writings, but also the Academy included specialists not100 • The Skeleton of Theorynecessarily sympathetic to his philosophy (DSB, 1981: 11:22–23). We take itfor granted that Plato was “Platonic,” just as we take it as part of his essentialqualities that he was Socrates’ star pupil. But this view is the result of manygenerations of filtering. Let us try to reverse the angle of perspective in time.Instead of taking “Plato” as a reified thing whose attributes we already know,let us place ourselves in the crowded network, amid its streams of culturalcapital and its eddies of emotional energies as they would have existed in theearly 300s b.c.e.What we see in Figure 3.4 that distinguishes him from his rivals among thefellow pupils of Socrates is Plato’s wide-ranging network contacts. Plato wasnot the only one to build on the mathematical heritage of the Pythagoreans;and on the metaphysical side, the Elis school and in a different way theMegarians continued the elevated Being of Parmenides. We moderns think ofPlato’s eminence as above all his raising the level of epistemological reflection;but such epistemological acuteness was very high in the Megarian school, andindeed was carried on more in the next generations by Eubulides and Stilpothan by Plato’s own successors. The fact that their texts do not survive, butPlato’s have, is not merely a historical accident; rather it is the result ofstructural domination over a period of generations, which selected which textswere to be elevated above the others. In an important sense, Aristotle’s splithelped constitute “Plato” in the long run as we have come to think of him.The division of the school into Speusippus’ line, which elevated mathematicsas a transcendent ideal of all knowledge and being, and Aristotle’s line, whichreduced this ideal to a part in a larger synthesis, crystallized out “Platonism”as one pole in an opposition. In view of the history of the next eight generations—which turned over the Academy first to religions of star worship andmystical numerology, and then to a very un-Idealist skepticism—we may evensay that Aristotle’s school was crucial in carrying along the memory of theideal-type Platonism as a foil during the time when it no longer had an activehome base.The key to Aristotle’s success was his explicit focus on the problem posedby the diversity of schools of his day, and his reflective awareness of how thisgrew out of the prior history of philosophical schools. Rival schools were alsoaware of this development; Aristotle’s contemporary Pyrrho took the disagreementof the schools as explicit warrant for relativism. Aristotle was anchoredin conflict with the dialecticians, such as his disputes with Eubulides theMegarian. Aristotle’s distinctiveness became the opposite intellectual strategy:to reduce disagreements by synthesis. The tools that he forged in this processare his long-enduring contribution to philosophy.It is not surprising that Aristotle and his school produced the first historicaltreatments of philosophy. These not only occur as a specialized genre but alsoPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 101figure throughout Aristotle’s arguments, where he sets up his own position asan answer to long-standing disputes. Part of Aristotle’s masterly tone is thedetachment with which he reviews contending positions, striving to pull outthe best side of each doctrine as he sees it. There were of course broad-rangingintellectuals before Aristotle. Empedocles had taught (if not written) on nature,medicine, religion, practical politics, and magic; the Sophist and mathematicianHippias of Elis boasted of encyclopedic knowledge, which he mastered by hissystem of mnemonics; Heraclides Ponticus (for a time in Plato’s entourage) wasastronomer, rhetorician, and wonder worker (Reale, 1987: 179–180, 354;1985: 65–66, 390–391; DSB, 1981: 6:405). More centered on purely intellectualmatters, Democritus ranged over epistemology, physics, mathematics,geography, botany, agriculture, painting, and the other special sciences andarts. An admirer of Democritus and an appreciative critic of Empedocles,Aristotle constructed an encyclopedic system, as if he had deliberately set outto synthesize and mediate every rival school in existence.Against Isocrates and the new schools of rhetoric, Aristotle provides aphilosophically grounded theory of rhetoric and of literature; against thelifestyle schools and debaters over value, he provides a systematic analysis ofethical doctrine as well as his own deliberately middle-of-the-road defense ofconventionality and moderation. He systematizes logic and metaphysics inconsciousness of the achievements of all existing schools, and thereby goesbeyond them in reflexive abstraction. Even the qualitative theory of music putforward by his follower Aristoxenus is aimed at undercutting the rival doctrineof the Pythagoreans based on numerical proportion (DSB, 1981: 1:281).Aristotle’s creativity lay in finding a device for synthesis, and thereby forreducing the surfeit of contending schools of his day. The most important resultwas his fourfold classification of causes as material, formal, efficient, and final,and his distinctions of potency and act, substance and accident. These classificationsintermesh. The material cause (identified with substance) is potential;formal, efficient, and final causes are actual. With these tools Aristotleunraveled the conundrums of the Eleatics and Heracliteans, mediated betweenPlatonic forms and the world of the senses, and rejected the relativists aspropounders of category mistakes. These were still hot contemporary debatesat a time, when the Megarians were pushing pre-Socratic paradoxes about theillogicality of change, and Cynics and Skeptics were denying the possibility ofboth knowledge and ethical judgment. Aristotle rescued both Being and changewith his analytical distinctions; found a place for nous, thought, in the materialuniverse by distinguishing potential and actual components of mind; andanswered the debate over the natural or merely customary nature of virtue bydistinguishing a natural potential for doing good from its actualization insocially acquired habits.102 • The Skeleton of TheoryAristotle seems to have been acutely aware of the growing presence ofa purely grammatical approach in the newly popular schools of rhetoric.Whereas Isocrates and his followers taught language merely as technique,Aristotle was at pains to coordinate the basic categories of the newly emergingsystematic grammar with his philosophical categories. The recently distinguishedparts of speech, nouns and adjectives, and the syntactical relations ofsubject and predicate, are coordinated with his metaphysical distinctions:substance and accident, species and genus, and thus with potency and act, andwith the universal metaphysics of causality. Aristotle’s corpus is not onlycomprehensive but architectonic. It is an exemplar of the synthesizing mode atits most impressive.His strategy paid off, in both the short and the long run. Most of the rivalschools collapsed, leaving the Aristoteleans the field—but only part of it, owingto the law of small numbers. His conceptual armory, forged in the most intenseperiod of intellectual maneuver that Western philosophy was to see for dozensof generations, was to prove potent in battles far removed from Aristotle’s owntime. But the very process of reducing the number of schools transformed thefield on which the Peripatos stood, and shifted its own position away fromAristotle’s hard-wrought synthesis.The Hellenistic Realignment of PositionsAround 300 b.c.e. we note an abrupt shift in the entire field. As virtually allof the older schools and lineages died out, two new major organizations werefounded out of their intellectual remains.19 While the Epicureans and Stoicsmade their appearance, the two remaining older schools, the Academics andPeripetetics, shifted their own grounds in intellectual space: the Aristoteleansto materialism and empirical science, the Academics to skepticism.Epicurus took the atomism of the Abdera school and the hedonism of theCyrenaics to formulate a thoroughly materialist doctrine in theology, physics,psychology, epistemology, and ethics, explicitly paralleling Aristotle’s in syntheticstyle while rejecting it in substance (Rist, 1972: ix). The Epicurean schoolsimultaneously moved into the space left by the demise of the lifestyle movements.This organization resembled a religious community (although pointedlyrejecting any connection with traditional deities), practicing a collective lifesupported by the goods of its members, and centered on quasi-religious ceremoniesin honor of the founder (Frischer, 1982: 38–86). To take over the ideasand practices of an existing intellectual faction is to risk losing one’s identityin theirs; but to take over their ideas after they are dead is both safe andprofitable. Epicurus established his independent identity by attacking his Democriteanteacher Nausiphanes and criticizing the Abderan tradition to thePartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 103extent of denying that Leucippus even existed. His appropriation of theircapital sealed their fate.Zeno of Citium in founding the Stoics reached far back for a distinctivecollection of intellectual forebears: Heraclitus for a cosmology of change(including such specific doctrines as the periodic extinction of the world byfire); Antisthenes’ ethical exemplar Heracles as emblem of the conquest of pain;the logos doctrine of a transcendent world order. Initially the Stoics incorporatedsomething of Cynic extremism, and aroused a good deal of scandal withtheir tolerance of incest and their doctrine of replacing the family with acommunity of men with women in common (Bryant, 1996: 439). This unconventionalitygave way within another generation, and by the time of Chrysippus,the Stoics had taken the opposite space from the Epicureans (and theirpredecessors in this respect, the morally anti-conventional Cyrenaics and Cynics)with respect to externals of lifestyle. Doing one’s ethical duty in socialobligations was a doctrine that appealed to the religiously secularized upperclass, and gave the Stoics a broad market base as a respectable form ofeducation.The Stoics captured the middle ground of public opinion about religion.They declared temples superfluous because man’s intellect is a portion of thedivine substance, and the true temple is the mind. Zeno and Chrysippusrejected the anthropomorphic gods but allowed them as symbolic (Dodds,1951: 238–240). In a larger perspective, the Stoics and Epicureans were competingover the same rationalistic religious space; the Epicureans too allowedthat the gods existed, but declared that they, like everything else, were composedof material atoms. This was in effect a defensive concession to popularreligion, which placed legal penalties on outright atheism in places such asAthens during these centuries. But the two schools were at pains to differentiatethemselves within this space, the Stoics taking a pantheist line, the Epicureansthe view that the gods existed concretely, but that they had nothing to do withhuman affairs, living in remote places in the void. The rival schools also carriedon the broad consensus of the preceding period that virtue resides in detachment,while disputing the nuances of apatheia (freedom from passion) andataraxeia (tranquillity of spirit). Underlying this dispute was a real differencein lifestyle orientation: the Epicureans withdrawing socially to achieve harmonythrough contemplation, the Stoics interpreting the ideal condition as aninner equanimity with which the wise man carries out his worldly duties.The shift to Hellenistic philosophy is usually attributed to changing externalconditions. A long-standing interpretation calls it a failure of nerve, a loss ofthe acute intellectual edge of Plato and Aristotle’s generations, and moregenerally the falling off into overripeness which in art history makes the veryterm “Hellenistic” a synonym for post-creative decadence. But in fact, periods104 • The Skeleton of Theoryof peak artistic creativity are not closely correlated with such periods in philosophy,as is clear from a generation-by-generation comparison in Greece,China, medieval through modern Europe, and elsewhere. The notion of anall-encompassing zeitgeist, whether golden or decadent, will not get us veryfar. A more explicitly sociological argument by Joseph Bryant (1996) attributesthe new contents of Stoic and Epicurean philosophies to the Macedonianconquest of the 330s, which destroyed the city-state democracies and replacedtheir citizen armies with mercenaries. If philosophy flourished in Athens becausepublic debate encouraged the skills of argument and focused on conceptsof public law and civic virtue (an argument also of Lloyd, 1990), the destructionof those external conditions is responsible for the shift to privatized ethics,a withdrawal from the ideal of citizen participation.What we miss here is the fact that the entire field of intellectual oppositionsshifted at this time. Aristotelean science, and the technical argument of Academicskepticism (and Stoic logic as well), were equally part of the Hellenisticcultural field. The timing, too, is not quite right. Bryant’s thesis works bestnot for the Stoic and Epicurean schools but for their predecessors in thelifestyle movements of the previous three generations, especially the Cynics andCyrenaics. The content of their doctrines is that of non-citizens, freed ofmilitary, family, and civic obligations. That describes well these men withouta city, some of them exiles (such as Diogenes, from far-off Sinope on the BlackSea), moving from place to place with little or no means of support. Theysurvived by a display of contempt for the conventional virtues, an épater lebourgeois which appealed to a sufficient audience of onlookers. And the veryexistence of this audience depended on the fact that an intellectual communitywas now well established, carrying on a distinctive forum of debate whosecontents changed across the generations.Most of the shift in ideas that followed the Macedonian conquest wasproduced not by change in the political context but by the law of smallnumbers. It was a time of great strain within the intellectual community. Thecompetition among too large a number of schools and factions meant thatmost of them could not survive in the long run; the successful schools werethose which seized on the weak ones, to amalgamate their doctrines into a fewworkable mixes. Aristotle had originated this maneuver, bringing togethermany of the finest available materials and crowning them with his synthesizingcreativity. Epicurus acquired what was probably the most powerful doctrinestill left without a strong base, that of the atomists, who heretofore had nowell-supported material organization in the Athenian metropolis. Plato’s Academyhad early drawn on a wide range of materials, and was the best positionedof the older schools, both materially and in intellectual turf, to survive in thetime of rival syncretisms. The Stoics, last to appear, took an uneven grab bagPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 105of leftovers. Their stance was to compromise among all the important positions.This left them with inconsistencies, such as between their materialistphysics and cosmology and their immaterialist religious strains, or betweentheir original Cynic rigorism and their emphasis on conventional duties.20Here organizational strength made a virtue out of intellectual weakness.A school stays alive by its controversies, and the Stoics attracted much attentionand produced a series of creative thinkers through the next two centuries.Immediately after Zeno, the school almost broke apart in internal controversies,between the religious emphasis of Cleanthes (successor ca. 262–232b.c.e.) and an extreme faction of logical rigorists led by Ariston of Chios(Reale, 1985: 216, 320, 417). The inconsistencies of Stoic doctrine werevigorously pointed out by rivals, the Academics in particular. The result wasnot the destruction of Stoicism but its vitality. Chrysippus, “the second founder,”carried out an impressive systematization on all fronts (unfortunately allsubsequently lost), deriving directly from his confrontation with the AcademicArcesilaus.The opposing schools shifted their intellectual contents together, their ideasdriven by underlying realignment of positions under the law of small numbers.The Academy repudiated the Idealism and mathematics-centeredness of thedoctrine of Forms, and took over the stance of skepticism; the Peripatos abandonedAristotle’s carefully wrought compromise with Platonism and movedtoward materialism and empirical science. The Aristoteleans under Theophrastushad already criticized the conception of an unmoved Mover outside theworld; the third scholarch, Strato (ca. 287–268 b.c.e.), allowed only immanentforces of weight and motion, and excluded final causes (DSB, 1981: 13:91–95;Reale, 1985: 103–105). Even the soul, he said, has no transcendent or immortalqualities; mental activity is the movement of the breath (pneuma).The Aristoteleans took this turn as a network connected with the outpouringof scientific activity at Alexandria. Through one of the ironic reversalscharacteristic of intellectual conflict, the Aristotelean-Alexandrian camp endedup with the leadership in mathematics as well, even though Aristotle himselfhad downplayed the role of mathematics as part of his struggle against thatfaction in the Academy. The Academy’s shift to skepticism left mathematicsadrift to be picked up by whoever wanted it. Epicurus, however, had polemicizedagainst mathematics, even throwing out Democritus’ considerable advances,probably to keep himself at the opposite pole from the idealist camp;and the Stoics had inherited the qualitative and teleological theme which hadplayed a role in Aristotle’s original formulations. The connection to mathematicsand natural science at Alexandria proved an easy alliance for the Aristoteleans,especially in the case of astronomy. In this orbit were producedEuclid’s systematization of geometry (ca. 300 b.c.e.), building on the Aris-106 • The Skeleton of Theorytotelean and Stoic methodology of definitions, postulates, and common notions;the mathematics of Eratosthenes (who headed the Library ca. 234) andof Archimedes;21 the heliocentric astronomy of Aristarchus of Samos (ca. 270);and the mechanics of Ctesibus and others. In addition, the Hippocratic medicalschools of Cos and Cnidus migrated to Alexandria at this time, where connectionswere kept up in medical science with the Aristoteleans, especially throughErasistratus;22 Herophilus the anatomist was directly connected with Strato’scircle. This scientific tradition lasted down through Hipparchus’ astronomy inthe next century.There was little in the external conditions of life of the Hellenistic periodthat turned thought in the direction of natural science. The explanation lies incompetitive forces internal to the intellectual field. The Aristoteleans weremoving in response to the popularity of the two new schools—the Epicureans’successful championing of materialism and the Stoics’ eclectic mix—and to theAcademics’ shift on the other side. It was safe to poach on Epicurean grounds,for there was no danger of losing identity with them, and the Aristoteleanswere already leaning in a materialist direction because of their conflict withinthe Academy. The Stoics probably tipped the balance toward a materialisticextreme, for they had already usurped a middle position combining a materialworld with a ruling spiritual form, the cosmic soul. The Aristoteleans’ attackon the notion of an immortal soul, and their reduction of soul to materialpneuma, which seems directed against the Stoics, propelled them into thematerialist corner.The Academy during this time underwent a paradigm shift amounting torevolution. Under Arcesilaus, a generation after Strato and a contemporary ofCleanthes at the Stoa, the Academics threw off their idealist metaphysics andepistemology and adopted skepticism. The way was prepared structurally bythe disappearance of the Skeptic lineage after Timon (Arcesilaus himself is thelast known tie; see Figure 3.4), and the collapse of the Megarian school. TheMegarians, defending the Eleatic thesis and attacking all forms of pluralism,including the Platonic forms (Reale, 1985: 50–53), had been, so to speak, the“right wing” of the philosophical world, with the Platonists occupying aslightly more moderate position. The Epicureans represented the “far left” ofmaterialism, with the Stoics in the compromise position at the center, and thevarious dropout positions (Cynics, Skeptics, later Cyrenaics) taking a deliberatetangent off from the center with a “plague on all houses” stance. In therealignment of schools, the anti-intellectual positions disappeared, though theirmoral force was appropriated by the Epicureans. The Aristoteleans switchedfrom a moderate position, a little to the “left” of the Platonists, to the extremematerialist left—a move which I judge to have been in response to the competitionfrom Stoics in the center.Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 107Arcesilaus’ skepticism appropriated a tool that had formerly been used onthe far “right” and among the dropouts standing above all the schools. Nowit was being used as a stance within the intellectual field itself rather than touphold a lifestyle movement as Pyrrho and Timon had done. Its focus ofattention was not to defend a positive doctrine, as in the case of the Megarians’Eleatic metaphysics, but to attack the technical doctrines of the Stoics. A purelyintellectual skepticism of this sort is parasitical on a strong opponent. Therevolution of the Academy, like that of the Peripatos, indicates just howdominating a presence the Stoa had become.The pre-reformed Academy had staked out a religious claim that the Stoicsdirectly challenged. Plato in his late work the Laws was advocating worshipof heavenly bodies, with the sun as object of a compulsory state cult. Speusippusand Xenocrates formulated a philosophical religion which foreshadowedthe Neoplatonism of five centuries later. Numbers were worshipped as ahierarchy of existence culminating in the One of pure Being (DSB, 1981:14:535; Dillon, 1977: 11–38). The Academy wavered over the introduction ofBabylonian star worship as an astronomical religion; other early scholarchs—including Xenocrates’ successor Polemon, who was one of Zeno’s early teachers—tried out ethical preaching, and attempted to mediate the ethical debatesamong the older Cynics and Cyrenaics and the new Epicureans and Stoics.Where Academic religion was esoteric, the Stoic school acquired a much moresuccessful base in popular religion, with the doctrine of the divine world-souland its worship in the temple of the mind, a doctrine which made room forparticipating simultaneously in public worship as an outward symbol. Zeno’ssuccessor Cleanthes, Arcesilaus’ contemporary, was especially known for hispiety and his hymns.Whereas Xenocrates had eliminated the dialectical element in Plato in favorof the religious, the new skeptical Academy reversed the emphasis. This ineffect signaled a decision not to contest the Stoics’ conquest of their religiousground, but to attack them for purely intellectual adequacy. Arcesilaus endedthe Academy’s wavering with a forceful shift to negative skepticism, elaboratedat a high level of technical sophistication. In religious questions its stancebecame a polemical agnosticism.Although we have lost most direct record of these generations, the battleamong rival Hellenistic schools was fruitful for a good deal of development inphilosophy. Later generations of Academics and Stoics lived in symbiosis,posing challenges for each other. Chrysippus, who deserted his teacher Arcesilaus,reformed Stoic metaphysics and promoted an innovative logic. Buildingon the first school of logicians, the now defunct Megarians, Chrysippus broadenedlogic far beyond Aristotle’s logic of syllogisms to a theory of conditionaland other complex propositions, providing formal proofs adumbrating modern108 • The Skeleton of TheoryEuropean logic.23 Chrysippus’ monistic system, which appropriated for Stoicismelements of the now disused Platonic metaphysics, was a springboard forCarneades’ sharpening of skepticism with a doctrine of probabilities; and thisin turn spurred the reformulations of Stoic physics and epistemology by Panaetiusand Posidonius. Pupils crossed over between the schools—Zeno, Arcesilaus,Chrysippus, and Carneades among them—honing the edge of debateacross the generations.The Roman Base and the Second RealignmentThe material bases of the entire philosophical attention space drasticallychanged when geopolitical triumph made Roman patronage the arbiter ofintellectual life. The balance of power among the kingdoms and militaryleagues that had divided Alexander’s empire was gradually brought into theRoman protectorate; by 86 b.c.e., when Athens was sacked by a Roman army,conquest was complete. Additional proof that the doctrines of the opposingschools were keyed to one another is provided by the intellectual realignmentwhich occurred when their organizations collapsed between 100 and 50 b.c.e.This is one of those places in history where the plate tectonics of social lifeslip, and the organizational bases of the older mentalities go down in thetemblor. After 50 b.c.e. there are no more long-lasting philosophical schools,in the sense of propertied organizations belonging to the teachers of a particulardoctrine. There remain individual teachers, sometimes constituting chainsof leading figures. But such organizations as might have existed were veryshort-lived.24In the transition to the Roman base comes an outburst of innovation, whichthen yields to a different way of intellectual life (see Figure 3.5). Stoicismreceives a new system with Posidonius, Epicureanism its classic formulation inLucretius. Aristoteleanism loses its independence from Platonic Idealism, whilePlatonism repudiates skepticism and goes back to an emanationist religiousontology, in syncretism with a revived neo-Pythagorean numerology. Skepticism,set adrift by the counterrevolution in the Platonic school, is picked upas the medical schools undergo their own doctrinal realignment, and receivesits classic formulation at the hands of Aenesidemus.In the generation when the Athenian schools disappeared, there was a flurryof innovation at the school of Stoicism at Rhodes, the last intellectual centeroutside Roman hegemony. Posidonius overthrew Chrysippus’ monism, substitutinga duality of matter and reason bridged by mathematical forms, anddefending Stoic epistemology against Carneades’ skeptical attacks on the uncertaintyof sense perception by holding that reason is a criterion of truthindependent of the senses (EP, 1967: 6:413–414). Posidonius followed the pathPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 109of synthesis, as if picking up doctrines from the wreck of the other schools,incorporating the mathematics, astronomy, and geography of Eratosthenes andHipparchus, and contributing scientific advances of his own (DSB, 1981:11:103–105). The reformed Stoicism of Posidonius, although famous in hisday, did not survive much past his lifetime, nor did his school at Rhodes; thelater Roman Stoics went back to preaching a crude amalgam of doctrines—FIGURE 3.5. REALIGNMENT OF SCHOOLS IN THE ROMANCONQUEST, 200 B.C.E.–1 C.E.110 • The Skeleton of TheoryHeraclitean fire, world-soul—that had been the object of so much refinementunder Academic attack.The other schools went through equally large doctrinal shifts. The Aristoteleans,who were already fading from intellectual prominence in the previouscentury, took the typical path of a weakening position and were becomingeclectic, wavering toward Epicureanism and Pythagoreanism. By the timeAristotelean doctrines came into Rome around 70 b.c.e., they were no longercarried by members of the Peripatetic school but by freelance scholars such asTyrannio and Andronicus of Rhodes (CHLG, 1967: 112–115; Guthrie, 1961–1982: 6:60–61). The materialism of the intervening period was forgotten, andAristotle’s texts were now seen as a modification of the Platonic doctrine ofForms.As the maneuvers of the past two centuries became unraveled, the Academyagain went through a revolution. Philo of Larissa (ca. 110 b.c.e.) had alreadysoftened the skeptical stance to fallibilism, emphasizing the difficulty of knowingbut upholding the goal of knowledge (Tarrant, 1985: 3, 54–57). This mightbe regarded as a concession to lay audiences, since a pure skepticism isintellectually respectable only within a well-buffered intellectual community,which was now collapsing. Philo was now dependent on the patronage ofRomans, who had been shocked by Carneades’ famous speeches while on anembassy in 155 b.c.e., when he defended justice one day and attacked it thenext. Philo’s pupil and successor Antiochus of Ascalon, who had high-rankingRoman sponsorship, went still further, to proclaim belief in the sage whoreaches full truth with unerring certainty. Antiochus attacked not only all-outskepticism but also the moderated forms of probabilism and fallibilism upheldby his predecessors in the Academy. His religious turn evoked protest amongthe more traditional members of the skeptical Academy. The controversyappears to have been responsible for the major creative development of theRoman transition.Skepticism has the peculiarity of acting as a meta-school above the clash ofpositions in intellectual space, and thus has a special appropriateness for timeswhen intellectual lines are chaotic. As the factions of Roman philosophy settleddown into syncretism, skepticism became their constant accompaniment. Italso acquired a distinctive material base within the medical schools, which nowtook a heightened organizational significance as organized philosophical traininglapsed.Both realignments of the philosophical schools—the Hellenistic realignmentaround 300 and the Roman realignment after 100—coincided with a rearrangementof medical schools. Around 300–250—which is to say, at the timeof the first great realignment in Hellenistic philosophy—the Empiricist physicianshad appeared (Frede, 1987: 236–239, 243–260). Empiricists stressed thePartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 111value of practical experience exclusively, against the philosophically orientedmedical schools of the day, based variously on Empedocles, perhaps on otherpre-Socratics, on Democritean atomism, and more recently on Peripateticdoctrines and associated anatomical researches. Empiricists adopted somewhatof a skeptical stance in taking a plague on all houses approach to divergenttheories, but their main contention was not itself a thoroughly skeptical epistemologybut rather the knowability of the observable and the unknowability ofthe unobservables posited by philosophical-medical theories. As the olderphilosophical factions died out, so did their medical branches, and they werereplaced by current fashions in the philosophical field. Epicurean atomismmade its first big impact at Rome with the popular medical lectures of Asclepiadesof Bythynia (ca. 100 b.c.e.); and the Pneumatist school of medicineappeared about the same time as the result of Posidonius’ innovations in Stoicphilosophy.As the Athenian philosophical schools collapsed in the next generation, themedical schools realigned. A new faction, the Methodists, challenged both theRationalists (i.e., all the older philosophical and physical doctrines) and theEmpiricists, proposing a middle position claiming that observations of dilationand constriction provide a basis for medical practice. This transformation ofthe medical turf seems to have been connected to the association, from thistime forward, of the Empiricists with skepticism in philosophy. The Empiricistphysician Heraclides of Tarentum (ca. 100 b.c.e.) was perhaps the teacher ofAenesidemus (Frede, 1987: 251–252). Aenesidemus went beyond the AcademicPhilo’s fallibilism to systematize the famous tropes, and rejected as dogmaticeven the claim to know nothing or to know probabilistically. Michael Frede(1987: 249; cf. 218–222) goes so far as to propose that “Pyrrhonian skepticism”was invented at this time and retrospectively attributed to a famousfounder.25 Aenesidemus’ position became a minority voice within philosophyover the next two centuries; the Academy had given up any part of the skepticalstance, and no other faction picked it up, as syncretism of positive doctrinesbecame the order of the day. Skepticism was to have one last flourish ofattention with Sextus Empiricus, in the intense fractionation of positions thatpeaked around 150–200 c.e., just as the basis of intellectual life began to shiftagain.One mystery remains. Every philosophical school had undergone repeatedrevolutions through these series of realignments, with one exception: theEpicureans. How did the Epicureans remain unchanging in doctrine despite allthis competition and organizational shift? One might also wonder how intellectualscan keep up any eminence at all by merely repeating an inheritedposition. But Epicureans had a series of fairly well known spokesmen for twohundred years, who wrote numerous books (Reale, 1985: 183–184). Their112 • The Skeleton of Theoryintellectual activity was sustained by applying their doctrine to current topicsin the special sciences, and by carrying on polemics against Stoics and Academics.These activities were remarkable for the steadiness of the battle lines,having little or no effect on either Epicurean doctrine or their opponents, norcontributing much to the development of the special sciences.One answer is that the Epicureans were organizationally more insulatedthan the other schools as a lifestyle community principally concerned withritual devotion by lay followers. Epicureans seem to have had little contactwith the networks of the intellectual world, judging from the infrequency ofties or crossovers to other schools (see Figures 3.4 and 3.5). It was well knownin antiquity that unlike in other schools, persons who joined the Epicureansnever left, giving rise to the famous jibe that they were like eunuchs in thisrespect (D.L., 1925: 4:43).26 But the lack of intellectual change remains apuzzle; their commitment to a lifestyle of withdrawal and non-intellectualcontemplation is paralleled by other organizations elsewhere, such as Buddhism,which nevertheless developed an active intellectual sector which gotswept up in the dynamics of doctrinal change.The stagnation of Epicurean doctrine is attributable principally to thelineup of factions across the intellectual field. The Epicureans anchored thefield as the most extreme doctrine, materialism. It was the positions nearer thecenter that rearranged their alliances in the maneuvers over intellectual turf.One might question why the opposite extreme on the idealist side did notremain firm; here the answer seems to be that the holders of that side—at onetime the Megarians with their Eleatic principle, Eudoxus’ school of mathematicalIdealism, the early Platonists—were nevertheless flanked by religious positionsin the popular culture, including astrology, star worship, the mysterycults. The transcendental-immaterialist side of the field was more crowded thanthe materialist end. The Epicureans early got hold of a coherent statement ofextreme materialism and were subject to no competitive pressures to changeit. Although their slot was never a highly popular one, it had a sufficientlysteady clientele, and their lack of great size kept them from the danger offragmenting with success which characterizes the law of small numbers.Within this general stability, the Epicureans show some perturbation at justthe time one might expect: the period of organizational transition, when theschool of Athens became defunct and intellectual life moved into the orbit ofRoman patronage. The upheaval in the organizational basis of intellectual lifeaffected Epicureanism as well. Zeno of Sidon, perhaps the last Epicureanscholarch at Athens (166 in Figure 3.5), criticized the Stoic epistemology andwent on to develop a philosophy of mathematics, based on the derivation ofall knowledge from experience (DSB, 1981: 14:612). This was an innovationin Epicurean doctrine, since Epicurus had pointedly disdained mathematics.Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 113Zeno of Sidon also criticized Euclid (who was associated with the Aristoteleansat Alexandria) and implied the possibility of a non-Euclidean geometry.In the next generation, Zeno’s pupil Philodemus was at Naples, where fora brief period Epicureanism received patronage from eminent Romans, includingthe circle of Julius Caesar. There was even something of a split in theEpicurean ranks at this time—the kind of thing one usually sees in a period ofsuccess, as opportunities open up—with Philodemus debating other Epicureansover theories of logic and mathematics (Rawson, 1985: 58–59, 295–296;Windelband, [1892] 1901: 195). There was even a move in the direction ofa theory of induction, a significant break in the logic of antiquity. In thissame period Lucretius set forth his—strictly orthodox—statement of classicalEpicureanism, apparently in a different circle than Philodemus’.27 The openingfor Epicurean popularity was brief; by the time of Augustus, a political crackdownon religious unorthodoxy had driven the Epicureans out of Rome, andwe see no more creativity from them through the end of antiquity.Formal Support in the Roman PeriodWhat stars there are in philosophical life are in the transition, when intellectualcapital is readapted to the upheaval in its institutional base. Here we findPosidonius, Aenesidemus, Lucretius, Cicero who acted as the broker for introducingGreek ideas into Rome. For the next half-dozen generations, intellectuallife settled into a routine. There were contending positions, to be sure, but thewell-known names are not very original by the standards of what went before,reformulators of doctrines with a backwards-looking bent, typically syncretizingpositions by taking off the sharp edge of critical acuteness. Beneath thispopularistic syncretism lies a new kind of material base.After the organized schools had broken up, unorganized movements reappeared.Many authors described themselves as “Pythagoreans”; but althoughthere had been an effort to revive a political movement at Rome under thatname (led by Cicero’s friend Nigidius Figilus around 50 b.c.e.), it is likely thatthe connection was merely figurative. Some positions retained the familiarlabels—Platonist, Aristotelean, Stoic—but their proponents were now freelancersrather than organizational members.28 Correspondingly, they were lesstrammeled in adhering to a pure line of doctrine. The Cynic style reappearsfor several generations after 100 c.e., with an outpouring of wandering streetpreachers, often blending showmanship and magic; they made up part of themovement of commercial teachers of rhetoric, on the one hand, as well asoccultist movements such as Gnosticism, on the other, characteristic of thatage (EP, 1967: 2:284–285; Hadas, 1950: 274–278, 287–290). The eclecticismof the Roman period was due in part to the lack of solid organizationalbackbone for distinctive network lineages.114 • The Skeleton of TheoryA type of formal position was later established, but these were positionswhich the philosophers themselves did not control, and which did not constituteschools in the organizational sense. In the period from 250 to 500 c.e.,there were municipal chairs of philosophy at Athens, Alexandria, and (after330) Constantinople. These were filled and paid for by the municipal authorities,occasionally by the emperor (CHLG, 1967: 274). Usually there was onechair, occasionally two, for a Platonist and an Aristotelean. The origins of thispractice seem to go back to 176 c.e., when Marcus Aurelius established fourchairs at Athens, for Platonic, Aristotelean, Stoic, and Epicurean philosophy,with an annual salary of 10,000 drachmas (Dillon, 1977: 233).29 The varietyof chairs dwindled down to the first two schools, and eventually only toPlatonists; we know of no more living exponents of Epicureanism anywhereafter about 200 c.e. or of Stoicism after 260 (DSB, 1981: 14:606).For the most part, incumbents of these municipal chairs were undistinguished.Formal control by lay authorities was not conducive to intellectualinnovation, a situation paralleling the performance of the official Preceptorsof the Han dynasty. The number of positions was small and fixed. The ImperialAcademy at Constantinople, enlarged by the emperor Theodosius II in 425,had some 31 chairs, all but one of them in grammar and rhetoric, and thesewere granted a monopoly on teaching in the city (Jones, [1964] 1986: 999;CHLG, 1967: 483–484). Private schools were allowed alongside the municipalones; most positions, both official and private, were in grammar and rhetoric,not philosophy. Many of the philosophers of later antiquity, from Apuleiusand Herodes Atticus (ca. 150) onwards, were rhetoricians by profession; thiswas particularly true of the Christian philosophers, especially before theirconversions. Augustine, trained in the famous rhetoric school at Carthage(where Apuleius had studied two hundred years before) acquired the importantposition of municipal professor of rhetoric at Milan; since this was the capitalcity, his duties included delivering official panegyrics on the emperor andconsuls each year (Brown, 1967: 69). This was also the weakness of suchpositions: florid verbal demonstrations in an archaizing style were valued overacuteness judged by an intellectual community.The big stimulus to intellectual life in later antiquity was not these municipallectureships but the autonomous organization of the growing ChristianChurch. This new kind of organization underlay the shift to sharper doctrinalstances in late antiquity, provoking greater definition on all sides of the oppositionalspace. The impetus was not the new religious movements per se. TheGnostic movements which spread at the same time as early Christianity overlappedthe milieu of freelance intellectuals, and had much the same syncretizingstyle. By 200 c.e., the training of Christian priests became increasingly formalized,and Christian intellectuals appeared, marking out their distinctive stanceamid the older philosophies. Formally organized pagan schools began to revivePartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 115in opposition. Plotinus moved from Alexandria, where he had been part of anetwork including Christian philosophers, to teach at Rome under aristocraticpatronage, and attempted unsuccessfully to establish a utopian community,called Platonopolis, in Campania (south of Rome) for his followers; his disciplePorphyry attempted to maintain the school, but was away from Rome (perhapsback in Egypt or Syria) a good deal in his later years (CHLG, 1967: 202, 284).The later Neoplatonists, from Iamblichus to Proclus, show every sign ofattempting to organize their own religion as a pagan counterpoint to Christianity,primarily in Syria and Asia Minor (especially Pergamum).When Christianity became the state religion, pagan philosophers made aconcerted effort to revive at least one of the old schools. In the generationsaround 400 c.e., the Platonic school reappeared as an institution at Athens(Glucker, 1978: 153–158, 306–315). With this new Athenian base, Neoplatonism,which after the end of Plotinus’ Roman school had been propagatedlargely as an occultist movement, once again developed as systematic philosophy,leading up to the major synthesis of Proclus, scholarch around 450.At Alexandria, too, Neoplatonism was introduced at about the same time(CHLG, 1967: 314–315). There were formal successions of scholarchs downthrough 529, when Justinian banned pagan philosophy in the empire. TheAlexandrian philosophers converted to Christianity before the Athenians, whoheld out to the bitter end.Syncretisms in Time of Organizational WeaknessStrong positions subdivide, weak positions combine: this is the inner dynamicof intellectual politics. For about 10 generations after the collapse of theAthenian schools, the organizational basis of intellectual life was in disarray.It would become firmly reshaped only with the consolidation of the ChristianChurch and its bid for power around 250, just at the time when a pagan unitedfront emerged around the Neoplatonism of Plotinus. Let us briefly view thepattern of the intervening centuries.The doctrines of all existing schools had undergone changes at the time ofthe organizational collapse, even (in their limited range) the Epicureans. Someversion of all the major positions survived, but now without self-confidence;instead of polemical attacks and staunch defenses, the tendency was to syncretize(see Figure 3.6). There was a telltale sign already at the time of Philoof Larissa (ca. 110 b.c.e.), who started the shift away from the skepticalAcademy and also began the migration of philosophers to Rome. Philo reconciledphilosophy and rhetoric (Rawson, 1985: 146), a seemingly innocuousstep, but one which ended a long-standing rivalry. Antagonism between thetwo learned professions went back to the opposition between the types of116 • The Skeleton of TheoryFIGURE 3.6. SYNCRETISMS AND SKEPTICISM, 1–200 C.E.schools founded by Plato and Isocrates, and before that to the struggle ofSocrates (or the image of Socrates projected by Plato) against the Sophists.Philosophers were seeking a new material base. The market for rhetoricians totrain orators and lawyers would become the prime support of intellectual lifeduring the Roman period.30 This alliance of philosophy and rhetoric was tobe a fateful one for subsequent thought, since it tended to make philosophicaldoctrines merely part of the rhetorician’s bag of tricks. The resulting tendencytoward eclecticism was especially prominent during the “Second Sophistic” ofthe 100s c.e., when public displays of flowery rhetoric were a prominent formof public entertainment.On the philosophical side, the overwhelming tendency was toward syncretism.The philosophical schools in their own right were weak and lacking firmorganizational bases, and they tended to huddle together for support. TheAcademy no longer existed as an organization; instead we find free-floatingPlatonists, whose main activity was to syncretize some version of the earlierdoctrines (i.e., from Plato through Xenocrates) with the old rivals. Aristoteleandoctrines were now up for grabs. The original texts had been recovered andpublicized, with no organized school to impose an orthodoxy upon them orto sustain the materialist science of the later Peripatos. Several versions ofAristotle were current; one of these amalgamated Aristotle with Plato into adualism of ideas (forms) plus matter, with mathematics (taken as equivalent tothe psychic level of the soul) as an intermediary between them. Another formof syncretism combined Plato’s dialogues with an ontological interpretation ofAristotle’s logic; this was pursued especially by the Platonic teachers such asApuleius at Athens and Albinus at Pergamum in the 100s c.e. (CHLG, 1967:64, 70).Yet another direction was to syncretize Plato with Stoicism. Antiochus ofAscalon had initiated this move from enmity to alliance, proclaiming Platonicknowledge the possession of a Stoic-like sage. Seneca taught a PlatonizingStoicism as part of his all-around syncretizing; he also frequently cited theStoics’ old foil Epicurus in support of Stoic ethical doctrines, and drew onpopular Cynic moralizing. Marcus Aurelius presented Stoicism as a grab bag,with little care for the incompatibility of different metaphysical strands and anoverwhelming emphasis on a moral stance. By the next century, Stoicism nolonger had a distinctive identity and gradually disappeared.The main intellectual action at this time consisted in positions pro and consyncretisms of various sorts. Numenius of Apamea (ca. 150 c.e.) claimed thatPlato and Socrates were Pythagoreans, that the Stoics derived their philosophyfrom the Academy, and that Aristotle’s philosophy had nothing to do withPlato’s (CHLG, 1967: 90, 96). Other Platonists during the century wereanti-Aristotelean but pro-Stoic, while yet others, such as Calvenus Taurus, were118 • The Skeleton of Theorypro-Aristotle and anti-Stoic (Dillon, 1977: 265; CHLG, 1967: 73–83). Someof these syncretisms provoked opposition and led to restatement of the morepointed doctrines. The famous Herodes Atticus polemicized against the syncretismof Plato with other doctrines. Lucian of Samosata, a rhetor, philosopher,and popular writer who settled in Athens around 150, made fun ofPlatonists, Stoics, Cynics, and Skeptics alike, especially on the grounds ofencouraging superstition, and stood up for the materialist position of theEpicureans (EP, 1967: 5:98–99).The last notable Skeptic, Sextus Empiricus, appears in this context (ca.200). Skepticism was a long-standing weapon in the dispute between medicaltheorists, and Sextus came from an empiric medical lineage in Asia Minor (andprobably Alexandria), though he was known primarily at Rome. He thusmoved in the same circles as his near-contemporary Galen (fl. 160–190), thelast great constructive medical theorist. Whereas Galen was a synthesizer ofdoctrines, Sextus took up the rival stance of criticizing them all, and Galen’smedical theories in particular. Both Galen and Sextus seem to have spokenprimarily to lay audiences and ranged much more widely than medicine. Galendefended Aristotelean logic and interpreted the works of Chrysippus andEpicurus, while his synthesis reached out to reconcile Plato with the Hippocraticmedical doctrine of the four humors (DSB, 1981: 5:227–237; Frede,1987: 279–298). Galen was operating in the world of the Second Sophistic,where public lectures and debates in a popular style provided the material basisfor intellectual careers, and even medical professionals got their patronage notprimarily through practice but through their impressiveness in exposition. Asif to show off his erudition, Sextus criticized all the arts and professions aswell as all intellectual positions; his Adversus Mathematicos piles on a veritableoverkill of skeptical arguments. As Figure 3.6 shows (see also unconnectedpersons listed in the key), the intellectual world around 150–200 c.e. wascrowded with diverse positions, a situation which provided a slot for skepticism.This situation changed rapidly in the next century. The battle lines becameoverwhelmingly aligned with religious positions, and both materialism andskepticism disappeared as a grand pagan coalition formed against Christianity.The Stimulus of Religious PolarizationIn late antiquity, religion triumphed over secular philosophy. Nevertheless, itincluded abstract philosophy of much greater long-term significance than anythingin the Roman period between the collapse of the Greek schools around100 b.c.e. and the eminence of Christianity after 250 c.e.: the work of Plotinus,Augustine, and a new level of rationalized theology including formal proofs ofPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 119God. Again, creativity was connected to the shift to a new organizational base.The organization of Christianity made it victorious amid the outpouring ofnew religious movements, for it was a centrally organized church, whereas theothers were not. Its incipient rational-legal administration fostered abstractintellectual activity, and its challenge to the old philosophical networks producedthe oppositions that fostered a burst of creativity on both sides of thedivide.Early Christianity formed around 30 c.e. in Palestine and spread rapidlyin the Jewish diaspora communities of Syria, Asia Minor, and the easternMediterranean over the next two generations. It remained particularistic in itscosmology and its ethics of salvation. Other branches of the anti-Talmudicreform movements within Judaism, from which Christianity sprang, pushedHebrew monotheism into syncretism with Greek philosophy. The most successfulfigure along this line was Philo of Alexandria (fl. ca. 25–50 c.e.), acontemporary of Jesus and Saint Paul, who seems to have known nothing ofthe Christian movement, and drew only on the Old Testament circulating inGreek within the diaspora communities. Philo assumed that the Greek philosopherswere indebted to the Pentateuch, identified Yahweh with Zeus, andinterpreted the cosmology of Genesis allegorically (CHLG, 1967: 137–157).Philo pushed a grand syncretism among Platonism, Pythagoreanism, and Stoicism,together with a religious monotheism largely shorn of its particularisticelements. Philo’s work was extremely popular, although not among Christianapologists of the first few centuries. It was carried, it appears, by a continuingmovement of proselytizers for a universalistic Judaism: that is to say, a rivalmovement to Christianity, which had begun by working the same market, butwhich had broken with its Jewish roots entirely at the time of Paul. This Jewishproselytization continued until after 200, when it was prohibited by the RomanEmpire; the Christian preacher John Chrysostom at Antioch was still warningagainst it around 390 (CHLG, 1967: 156).A three-sided struggle took place in and around Judaism during the firsttwo centuries c.e. Two of the wings were Christianity as an anti-philosophicalreligious movement, and syncretism with Hellenistic philosophy such as Philoof Alexandria’s. A third wing had a militantly anti-rabbinical tone; this comprisedmany of the Gnostic sects, which went so far as to incorporate Yahwehas one of the demons or as the evil demiurge responsible for the ensnaringmaterial world (Jonas, 1963). For a long time Christianity was not very visibleamong these sects, at least from an intellectual’s point of view. Celsus (ca. 160c.e.) did not distinguish Christians from Gnostics (CHLG, 1967: 80).It is characteristic of the occultist movements of this time that they werepolemical and exclusive; they also proliferated across the landscape like a120 • The Skeleton of Theoryconfident social movement expanding into widely available niches. This describesthe various Gnostic sects and the secret societies that promulgated themany versions of pagan Hermeticism. Occultist secret societies and more openreligious organizations were the expanding structures of this period, and theyunderwent the doctrinal splintering characteristic of their strength. Their doctrineswere usually only marginally philosophical: they did not typically operatewith very abstract concepts or conceptual and logical self-reflectiveness,but they asserted particularistic symbols—good and evil gods, demons—allwith rather concrete characteristics and modes of ritual propitiation. Intellectualterritory per se began where these concepts were rationalized, typically byassociation with some version of idealist philosophy.The structure of the Gnostic and occultist groups may be inferred from theproliferation of anonymous and pseudonymous manuscripts claiming to representthe ancient wisdom of Hermes Trismegistus, of Pythagoras, of theChaldeans (Babylonian priests) or Egyptians. The form and content of the textsimply a series of small secret groups, based on transmission from a reveredmaster to initiates (Fowden, 1986: 156–160, 189–193). But secrecy was oftenbroken, and the organizational chains were rarely sustained beyond the lifetimeof particular charismatic leaders. Some of the Gnostic organizations did better,such as those of Valentinus or Mani, which widened out beyond little circlesof the “elect” to build churches encompassing ordinary people (Fowden, 1986:189). This gave them greater staying power, and also put them into directcompetition with the Christian Church, which typically treated them as hereticalrivals.Whereas the Gnostic sects and other occultist movements were usuallysmall-scale secret societies, the Christians concentrated on building an organizationalhierarchy, with centralized procedures for appointing priests and aunified discipline and doctrine (Jones, [1964] 1986: 873–933; Chadwick, 1967:54–66; Telfer, 1962). The fact that Christian texts are not anonymous but areattributed to persons whose names are tied to the church’s hierarchical successionrepresents the routinization of charisma and the bureaucratic continuitywhich the Gnostics lacked. The crucial inheritance from Judaism was notmerely monotheism but the fact that, in contrast to other monotheisms suchas the cult of Mithras or a universal goddess such as Isis or Cybele, it was areligion of the book. The scripture itself was the focus of holy ritual, and theorganization necessarily had a core of literate specialists, providing a base forits own intellectuals. Even if the contents of the original scriptures wereparticularistic histories and mythologies, the combination of the focus on atext plus the centralizing organization provided key elements of a rational-legalbureaucracy, and hence the basis for more abstract and universalistic interpre-Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 121tations of doctrine. Whereas the Gnostics and their pagan equivalents were adhoc networks of part-time participants, the church had a material foundationwhich enabled it to support full-time priests, to send out missionaries, topublicize martyrs and support widows and orphans of those fallen in thefaith.31 It was this organization that eventually proved attractive to the Romanstate administrators as an adjunct to their own organization; and it was anorganization whose material basis was to prove more enduring than the stateitself at the fall of the empire.It took numerous struggles to consolidate such an organization, especiallywelding the sphere of control by bishops and metropolitans. The heresydisputes which wracked the church were a sign of emerging organizationalstrength, for only a centralized organization can enforce doctrinal orthodoxy.The most serious external rival were the Manichaeans, not because they basedtheir doctrine on Gnostic themes, but because they formed a mass-recruitmentchurch competing in the bastions of Christian strength—Carthage and Rome.All of the church’s moves in the heresy disputes can be seen as a defense of itsdistinctive organizational structure. Any doctrine was opposed as heresy whichdestroyed the chain of command of the central church hierarchy, which disputedthe right to appoint priests or to retain control over ascetic monks. Itwould be even more accurate to say that the faction within church politicswhich made these organizational choices emerged as the orthodoxy; whicheverfaction favored the most permanence-enhancing organizational structure wasin fact the one to win out. Meditative monks living in the desert gave a greatdeal of trouble, and mysticism and occultism were rejected if they broke fromthe community of lay worshippers under the ritual leadership of centrallyappointed priests. The Gnostics, as movements of part-time amateurs meetingaround favorite personalities, were an organizational enemy. So was any greatemphasis on magic, since it is decentralizing, with little call for a formalhierarchy. Also ruled out were purely intellectual modes of salvation, sincethese would exclude the mass of the population, especially the popular basewhich, among monotheistic religions, Christianity had made almost uniquelyits own.The result was that Christianity could not go to extremes of idealism,rejecting the value or the reality of the material world. Idealist intellectualdoctrines could be admitted, but only as an activity of specialized theologianswithin the organizational hierarchy of the church. Such doctrines could not beallowed to have an effect on practice to the extent of devaluing ordinary work,money making, or politics, which were activities on which the church dependedfor its strength. For this reason, Christianity came to incorporate more andmore of the surviving elements of materialist philosophy in late antiquity,especially as the pagan united front centered on mysticism and idealism.122 • The Skeleton of TheoryThe Showdown of Christianity versus the Pagan United FrontConsider the successive stances taken by Christianity and the pagan philosophiestoward each other. The earliest Christian philosophers, writing in consciousnessof their weakness, are apologetic. Justin (ca. 150 c.e.), who studiedat Ephesus before his conversion, tries to justify his faith by showing itscompatibility with Platonism and Stoicism (CHLG, 1967: 158–167). In thenext generation, Clement of Alexandria, who was taught by an ex-Stoic andhad likely been at Athens, echoes the same themes as the pagan syncretizers,as well as drawing on the Jewish syncretism of Philo of Alexandria twocenturies before. As the church gathers strength in the following generation(the early 200s), Origen uses Philo’s allegorical methods, but the emphasis nowhas left the abstract plane of metaphysical similarities with the pagan philosophies(CHLG, 1967: 189–192). Instead Origen stresses the particularisticelements, and strikes back at the pagan critic Celsus by claiming that the OldTestament provided the basis of Greek ethics and science. This is argument onthe same plane as that of the Taoists who disparaged their Buddhist rivals inChina by claiming that their doctrine had been taught to them originally byLao Tzu on his travels to the West.Until 200 c.e., the professional philosophers seem oblivious to the threatof Christianity. Sextus, though he attacked everything else, did not bother toattack the new religions, which must indicate that as yet they had little presenceamong intellectuals. The “pagan” philosophers of this period did not defendtraditional polytheism, or even pay much attention to it; their interest inreligions, if they had any, was in mystical doctrines which could be interpretedas universalistic metaphysics. The Gnostic and occultist sects were a separateenclave, full of particularistic doctrines and generally looked down upon byserious intellectuals.Now a new organizational player became visible on the field, and the termsof play were transformed (see Figure 3.7). Around 250 c.e. the power ofChristianity was becoming visible, with sympathizers in high political circles.In the series of political coups around the middle of the century, there weresharp reversals of religious policy. The reign of Alexander Severus (222–235)was sympathetic to Christianity, and Philip the Arab (r. 244–249) was rumoredto be a believer; in between, Maximinus (235–238) was hostile. Decius (249–251) launched a crackdown by ordering everyone to participate in sacrificesto the gods, but the edict was withdrawn by Gallienus in 260. Aurelian in274–275, seeking to replace the traditional cults, tried to establish the monotheismof the sun god (Chadwick, 1967: 119–122). The strength of Christianorganization was beginning to tell. The first large-scale systematic persecutionsof Christians, begun under Decius in 250, resumed under Diocletian in 304 asPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 123FIGURE 3.7. SHOWDOWN OF NEOPLATONISTS AND CHRISTIANS,200–400124 • The Skeleton of Theorya death-grip struggle over power. When the persecutions were called off soonafter Constantine’s victory ending civil war in 311, it was only a short step tothe adoption of Christianity as the official religion of the empire, which hadtranspired by the time of his death in 337.The transition brought one more major burst of creativity. Plotinus puttogether an all-encompassing system based on Platonism, which served simultaneouslyas a religion. Plotinus had been educated in the circles in Alexandriawhich produced Origen, and he was in the entourage of the emperor Gordianin Mesopotamia when the latter was murdered in 243 by adherents of Philip,the emperor rumored to be a secret Christian (CHLG, 1967: 201).32 Thepolitics of this period were volatile, and it was not yet so clear that Christianitywas to be the dominant religious force. But occultist movements were extremelyprominent, and Plotinus threw his energies into capturing their essencefor a rationalistic philosophy while purging their particularistic and “lower”forms. He attacked the blasphemous silliness of astrology, and he and hisfollowers were especially hostile to Gnostic magic, which competed directlyfor the interest of his own circle (CHLG, 1967: 205–210).The metaphysical elements of Plotinus’ system were already long in existence.The hierarchy of ontological levels based on the Pythagorean doctrine ofnumbers goes back to Speusippus and Xenocrates, before the Academy turnedSkeptic. Aristotle’s analysis of levels of generality in logic provided anotherversion of a hierarchy which could be bent to this purpose; and the syncretizingMiddle Platonists and neo-Pythagoreans had elaborated various versions of theontological scheme. In Plotinus’ version there are three hypostases: the One,which is beyond number and name, and can be spoken of only metaphorically;the Intelligence (nous), made up of Ideas in something like the Platonic sense,which are models of particular things but also their substance and true Being;and the Soul, the maker of the Cosmos, and which refracted through matteris Nature, the realm of sense and multiplicity, with lower and vegetative soulsas well as individual human souls. The lower hypostases emanate from thehigher, which also provide a path upward to the One as the goal of everythingbelow.Most of these elements can be found somewhere among Plotinus’ predecessors,but the package is different. Many of the Middle Platonists placedemphasis on the intellect as the supreme principle of reality, whereas Plotinusstressed the distinctive level of transcendence beyond intellect and being.Plotinus was most original in arguing that the level of the intellect is notseparate either from mind (after the fashion of the Platonic Ideas) or fromparticular objects. Instead the world, mind, being, and thought are unified; theacts and objects of thought are identical. Plotinus’ system is a more thoroughgoingidealism than any other ancient philosophy.Partitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 125Plotinus was vastly more famous and influential than these predecessors,in part because he was more systematic in his exposition, writing coherenttreatises instead of commentaries and defenses of earlier philosophers. Moreimportant, the context and purpose of his writing had changed. Plotinusreflected above all on the nature of transcendence, on what can be conceivedto be beyond the finiteness of every plane, whether material, mental, or formal.Earlier thinkers had approached their highest categories—God, the PythagoreanOne, the Form of Forms, Goodness, the Unmoved Mover—from below,as logical extensions of a number philosophy or a physics or an examinationof the formal level beyond particulars. Plato, who in the intellectual contextof his day was most concerned to combat the schools of relativism andparadox, gave no consistent doctrine on the issue of the plurality of Forms andtheir source; for him, these were rough edges at the outer limits of his thinking.For Plotinus, transcendence was the starting point, which he set out to makephilosophically respectable. This new emphasis can be attributed to the structuralchange that was occurring in the intellectual world around 250 c.e.The Stoic and Epicurean schools had disappeared by about this time; sohad the neo-Pythagoreans, the wandering Cynics, and the popular rhetors ofthe Second Sophistic; so too had the development of Aristotelean science.Plotinus forged a united front of all the surviving philosophies, together withthe most intellectual elements from the non-particularistic religious or occultmovements. For this purpose he appropriated elements of the schools whichhad now collapsed, purging them of their materialism. He used Aristoteleancategories, and drew on Stoic elements such as the universal sympathy ofnature. He took over what he could of natural science, interpreting cause-andeffectrelations as reflections of higher forms, with light as a visible manifestationof divine goodness (DSB, 11:41–42). He rejected occultist practices suchas spirit-calling because they reinforced the particularism and fragmentationof the inchoate religious movements. Plotinus sublimated them all into puretranscendence as a banner under which all could unite. The period of the loosesyncretisms and debates among disorganized schools of thought which hadcharacterized the previous two centuries gave way to a sense of showdownagainst an external enemy. Plotinus provided the tightly argued system thatdrew together what was now identified as pagan philosophy against the growingpower of the church.The next generations of Plotinus’ followers intensified the battle. By 275c.e., the time of Aurelian’s official cult of the sun god, Porphyry had becomethe outspoken opponent of Christianity. Plotinus died in 270. His writings,which circulated only within the circle of disciples, were edited for publicationby Porphyry around 305, as if deliberately to throw them into the deathstruggle against Christianity. Porphyry concentrated on technical argumenta-126 • The Skeleton of Theorytion, borrowing Stoic logic of propositions and terms, and augmenting Aristoteleancategories to structure the metaphysical system (CHLG, 1967: 283–293). So far, philosophy prevailed over the religious elements in the synthesis.In the next generation, Christianity triumphed politically. The Neoplatonistschool became the center of political opposition to Christianity and campaignedfor the restoration of traditional cults (CHLG, 1967: 279–280).Plotinus’ pure intellectuality forged at the moment of transition could not bemaintained; popular techniques of magic increasingly prevailed as the movementwent underground. Iamblichus put theurgy—the process of becoming agod by magical procedures—above intellectual philosophy. From now on,Neoplatonists claimed powers such as clairvoyance, the ability to raise phantomsand to work magic spells. The coalition was widened into one last grandeffort to oppose Christianity. Iamblichus brought in Gnosticism (anathema toPlotinus), the Egyptian mysteries, the anachronistic Chaldean Oracles (CHLG,1967: 277–279, 295–301). The movement was not without political successes:a circle of Iamblichus’ spirit-calling followers at Pergamum encouraged theyoung Julian in the direction that would lead to his brief overthrow of officialChristianity during 361–363. (Chadwick, 1967: 157; EP, 1967: 5:175).The last great thinker of pagan philosophy, Proclus, followed in the revivedchain of Platonic scholarchs at Athens. Proclus was devoutly religious inanything non-Christian, observing all the holy days and rituals of the Egyptianand Greek calendars and all the mysteries from the Chaldean to the Orphic,practicing theurgy (which he learned from a daughter of Plutarch, the Athenianscholarch) and claiming to conjure luminous phantoms of the gods (DSB,1981: 11:160; CHLG, 1967: 302–313). What makes Proclus intellectuallysignificant is that his extreme syncretism now attempted to preserve all paganlearning. He commented on Euclid and Ptolemy, and arranged Aristoteleanphysics and astronomy into systematic form with propositions and proofs.Emulating Euclid, he even produced a systematic Elements of Theology, inwhich the elaborations of post-Iamblichian gradations of being are given ingeometrical reasoning. For all its arbitrary contents, the last wave of the paganunited front put everything into a grand synthesis under the most rigorousmethod achieved by the entire historical community of Greek intellectuals.While the pagans’ creativity went into joining ranks, the victorious Christianswere expanding laterally across intellectual turf. The great wave ofheresies internal to Christianity took off as the church gathered strength; unlikethe earlier argument against the Gnostics, who were non-organizational factions,these were battles over control of the church organization itself. Theheresy disputes around the Monarchians, Arians, Monophysites, and Pelagianswere on one plane power struggles within the church. But they were carriedout with intellectual tools, on the level of philosophical abstractions, ratherPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 127than merely by asserting the precedence of one’s particularistic symbols overothers’ (such as the names of gods and demons, characteristic of the Gnostics).33 Arius and his adherents, involved in a struggle in the 320s and 330sthat tested the power of the bishop of Alexandria against the other great churchmetropoles, made use of Origen’s transcendent monotheism, formulated withthe development of Christian philosophy two generations before (EP, 1967:1:162–164). By contrast, the “Cappadocian fathers,” influential in court circlesin the 370s and 380s, and thus victorious in the struggle to constitute orthodoxy,made use of Aristotelean and Middle Platonist doctrines in expoundingtheology (CHLG, 1967: 432–447; Chadwick, 1967: 148–152). (Figure 3.7shows the connections of Saint Gregory of Nazianzen, Saint Gregory of Nyssa,and others with pagan philosophers at Athens, Constantinople, and Antioch.)The Christians represent the victorious side of the law of small numbers,subdividing intellectually to fill the expanding space available to them. Like allstrongly based intellectuals, they appropriated intellectual capital from movementswhich were collapsing: Middle Platonism at first, and later when itspolitical strength was vitiated, Neoplatonism as well. Pagan concepts becamethe weapons for heresy disputes. The Christian doctrine of the Trinity, whichemerged after 150 c.e., may well have been inspired by the propensity of theMiddle Platonists and neo-Pythagoreans to expound triadic hypostases of theoriginating One.34 Puzzles in reconciling identity and difference among partsof the Trinity were taken up as occasions for dispute around the time whenChristianity came into political respectability and then power. Technical categoriestaken over from the amalgamation of Aristotelean logic with Platonismahomoousios (of dissimilar essence) and homoousios (of identical essence),were the slogans of the Arians and their opponents, and the logic-choppinghomoiousios (the likeness of an image to its archetype) became the heatedsubject of would-be compromise. The Council of Constantinople in 381 usedthe doctrine of hypostases to expound orthodoxy concerning the parts of theTrinity (Chadwick, 1967: 129–151). From another angle, one sees the pagannetworks migrating into the center of action, which is now on Christian terrain.Saint Jerome was connected with the Middle Platonist faction; his doctrinalopponent Saint Augustine derived from a Neoplatonist lineage (Marius Victorinus,Simplicianus) which was now giving up the struggle and convertingunder pressure to Christianity (CHLG, 1967: 342–343; Brown, 1967: 271–275). These abstract heresy disputes are a sign of the intellectualization ofChristianity as it took over the philosophical attention space.The great Christian philosophers are those most centrally involved inintellectual networks connecting back to the accumulated sophistication of thepagan philosophers, as well as into the church power hierarchy at the time ofthe heresy disputes. It is not surprising that figures such as Augustine and128 • The Skeleton of TheoryAmbrose should appear at this time.35 The most talented and ambitious intellectuals,heretofore pursuing careers as rhetors and officials, went over to thechurch. It was now an institution of increasing power whose wealth andprivileges were rapidly coming to exceed those of Roman officialdom (Jones,[1964] 1986: 904–910, 933–934).36The most important philosophical result came from Augustine’s effort towin over the remnants of his own intellectual class, the sophisticated Romanaristocracy, for whom Neoplatonism, and indeed the whole pagan philosophicaltradition, was superior to the particularisms of Christian doctrine.37 In thelate 380s, just after Augustine’s conversion, he produced his major contributionsin pure philosophy. Mindful of the Ciceronian bias of rhetors like himself,he developed a refutation of skepticism (Weinberg, 1964: 30–43; Brown, 1967:102). Augustine’s argument was a version of the “cogito ergo sum” later usedby Descartes to undergird a system much the opposite of Augustine’s. Theproof developed by Augustine moves from the certainty of self-knowledge, toan interior sense by which the exterior senses are judged, and to the implicationthat a standard exists by which reason operates—a standard which Augustineidentifies with God. Augustine thus anticipates both Descartes and Anselm,and elaborates a more refined psychology around the capacities of memory,understanding, and will. In his subsequent career, Augustine was largely caughtup in harsh polemics against religious rivals. He rose to a higher intellectuallevel when he wrote again for educated pagans, producing his City of God toshow the drift of world history toward the triumph of Christianity rather thanof the now crumbling Roman Empire (Brown, 1967: 299–307). Its success wasdue not just to his being on the victorious side, but to its encyclopedic displayof pagan cultural capital in a Christian context.There were intellectual consequences on the losing side as well. Theurgydisappeared from philosophy after the failure of the pagan united front. It hadbeen an alliance of desperation in the heat of battle. Now the vulgar elementscould be dropped, and the integrating structure of idealism was no longernecessary. Aristoteleanism and materialism made a comeback at Alexandriaand Constantinople (see the tail end of Figure 3.8). Ammonius (304) son ofHermias, who held the Platonist chair at Alexandria in the late 400s, turnedfrom Neoplatonism back to Aristotle (CHLG, 1967: 316). John Philoponus,a Christian and probably the last holder of a philosophy chair at Alexandriabefore it was abolished by the emperor Justinian in 529, rejected Proclus’hierarchy of spirits, and defended empirical science as more compatible withthe Christian God, creator of a material world. Philoponus attacked the idealistelements of Aristotelean metaphysics, including the distinction between thecelestial realm of perfect mathematical motion and the sublunar world ofqualitative matter, and revived Stoic materialism and observational sciencePartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 129FIGURE 3.8. NEOPLATONISTS UNDER CHRISTIAN TRIUMPH,400–600130 • The Skeleton of Theory(CHLG, 1967: 478–483; DSB, 1981: 7:134). From Philoponus and his responseagainst Proclus’ last round of pagan critique, too, came the developmentof new formal proofs of God, which would become the substance of laterrational theology. The whole pagan syncretism had fallen apart with thetriumph of Christianity; the elements which had been buried under the idealistunited front now were released again into general circulation.Two Kinds of CreativityCreativity is forced by changes in the structure of intellectual communities, likefluid squeezed through the spaces as blocks shift their alignment. There aretwo polar types of creativity: the creativity of fractionation as thinkers maximizetheir distinctiveness, and the creativity of synthesis as intellectuals makesalliances among weakening positions or attempt to reduce a crippling overloadas factions exceed the law of small numbers. The grand philosophical systemsare the high points of the synthesizing dynamic. Here we find Aristotle forgingnew analytical tools to reconcile the quarrels among the outpouring of schoolsin the post-Socratic generation. Here is Plotinus blending the accumulatedsophistication of the long-standing schools into a rationalized pagan religiousphilosophy to stand against the new menace of Christianity. The creativity ofthe fractionalizers is more polemical and extremist. At its most brilliant, it risesto the poetic visions of Heraclitus and Parmenides.Synthesizers are necessarily dedicated to a vision of an overarching truth,and display a generosity of spirit toward at least wide swaths of the intellectualcommunity. Each contributes partial views of reality, Aristotle emphasizes;so does Plotinus, and Proclus even more widely with the ecumenism of hisbizarre coalition; even errors move us forward. Fractionalizers, with a contrastingspirit, are attached to their opponents only in a negative way. Theearliest Greek philosophers, moving into an empty field, create one doctrineof cosmological elements after another. In much the same way the smallGnostic sects move into a new religious space, proliferating particularisticdifferences among themselves. Socrates too is a fractionalizer, blithely spinningoff possibilities with the prodigality of a colonizer of empty spaces. A highdegree of splitting in the field opens a slot for skepticism, attacking anystandard of truth at all; when this emerges as a doctrine, it is a sign ofovercrowding in the intellectual field.One might suppose that fractionation and synthesizing would be symmetrical.When one organizational side of the field is growing stronger, its rivalsshould be weakening. Thus we find the pagans from Plotinus to Proclus in thesynthesizing mode, while the aggrandizing Christians are busy with heresydisputes. We shall see this reciprocal pattern between Hindus and BuddhistsPartitioning Attention Space: Ancient Greece • 131in India, and again between weakening and expanding Buddhist lineages inChina. But it is not necessary that there should always be a strong organizationalposition; this depends on external conditions, such as the political forceswhich determine the ups and downs of religions. There is also an internaldynamic which will produce splits, and if this goes on long enough, countermovestoward synthesis to reduce the diminishing attention enforced by thelaw of small numbers. The fractionalizing mode prevailed alone in Greekphilosophy for the first six or eight generations, and the synthesizing moves ofAristotle, Epicurus, and the Stoics occurred in response to the self-engenderedweakness of this proliferation of schools. For the earliest period, there was noway at all to prevent splits; given the opening up of an empty field, it wasstructurally impossible that Greek philosophy could have reached consensusaround a position like that of Thales or Pythagoras.The pure forms of creativity, fractionalizing and synthesizing, are idealtypes. They have real exemplars when appropriate conditions prevail, butmuch of intellectual history consists of mixed cases. There are both strong andweak forms of synthesis; the latter is better called syncretism. The lowest levelof syncretism represents an effort to overcome factional differences by theintellectual equivalent of brute force, declaring that Buddha’s doctrines werestolen from Lao Tzu, or that Plato and all the other schools had their ideasfrom Pythagoras or ancient Egypt. We see a more moderate but weak form ofsyncretism in the first two centuries of the Roman Empire, when there was arelatively stable array of philosophical positions, none of them enjoying verystrong organizational bases. Here Platonists, Aristoteleans, Stoics, and rhetoricianswavered back and forth, asserting mixtures of one version with another.The period is characterized by no great analytical advances. The same is truelater, when Iamblichus and his followers arbitrarily chop new rungs into theNeoplatonist hierarchies of ontological emanation to fit a panoply of deitiesand magical forces from their grand alliance of cults. A weak organizationalbase and correspondingly permeable boundaries between intellectuals and layconcerns produce the admixture of particularistic elements which is one of theconditions promoting syncretism rather than synthesis.The grand systems of synthesis are those which take differences seriouslyrather than overriding them. Logically inconsistent elements are worked upon,and this results in a new framework or new analytic conceptions. Plotinus,much more than his Middle Platonist predecessors, is aware of the differencesbetween Plato and Aristotle, and is willing to criticize the Stoics on the soul asa material substance at the same time that he adapts from them moral teachingsto use against the Peripatetics (CHLG, 1967: 197–199, 226). It is this effortto shape existing elements selectively into a comprehensive picture that distinguishesstrong synthesis from weak syncretism. The key condition is the mo-132 • The Skeleton of Theoryment of organizational transition. Since there is more analytical work to bedone in reorganizing intellectual alliances, the creative advance is the moreimpressive. Plotinus’ vision of the material universe floating in soul like a netin the ocean could be equally an expression of his predecessors’ ideas in relationto his own harmonious system: “The cosmos is like a net thrown into thewaters, immersed in life, unable to make that in which it is its own. Alreadythe sea is spread out, and the net spreads with it as far as it can, for no oneof its parts can be anywhere else than where it is. But because it has no sizethe Soul’s nature is sufficiently ample to contain the whole cosmic body in oneand the same grasp” (Plotinus, Enneads 4.3.27.9).Can we conceive of all intellectual history as the working out of these twoforms of creativity, with their varying degrees of strength and their mixedforms? In China, one can already feel the affinity of figures such as Mo Ti,Chuang Tzu, and the Ch’an Buddhists with the fractionalizing style, and thegrand syntheses of Tung Chung-shu or Chu Hsi with organizational alignment.Let us see.