CHAPTER 4£Innovation by Opposition:Ancient ChinaAs we turn from Greece to China, it is tempting to indulge in visual insightsabout the “spirit of the place.” Some have found the lucid rationality of theGreeks a mirror of the pure light and clear skies of the Mediterranean. Chinesephilosophy has seemed filled with a spirit like the crooked shapes of treebranches looming through the mountain mist in the paintings of Ma Yüan orShên Chou. This resonance with the landscape is our self-imposed illusion. Thegolden sunlight beat down on the blue Mediterranean in late antiquity as itdid in the classic epoch; only philosophy had moved indoors to temple roomsfilled with the smoke of idols delivering messages from demons and gods. Thechange convinced Spengler that the geometric space of the classic Greeks hadgiven way to a Magian-Gnostic vision of the cosmos trapped inside a cavern.Yet it was Plotinus at Rome and Proclus at Athens who epitomized this interioratmosphere, while outdoors they still strolled the marble colonnades. Whathad arisen was an inability to see things any longer in the clear sunlight, justas it was the rise of Buddhist and Taoist movements that shaped the wayChinese painters came to present their environment.Ancient China illustrates a principle of worldwide application. Intellectualcreativity is driven by opposition. Philosophical positions develop by takingone another as foils. The attention space is shaped by arguments, not byresolutions. It is when the oppositions come to an end, when Chinese philosophysettles into a period of hegemonic consensus, that creativity freezes. Thisis not only an application of the formal sociological point that creative leadersappear simultaneously, dividing the field under the law of small numbers. Thecontents of philosophical ideas are also made up by the pattern of oppositions.The Sequence of Oppositions in Ancient ChinaChinese philosophy begins in dispersion and conflict. Confucius and his followerssprang up around 500 b.c.e. in conscious opposition to existing politi-137cal and religious practices (see Figure 4.1). The Mohists emerged two generationslater with doctrines explicitly contradicting many Confucian points. Bothschools of moralistic activism were soon challenged by Yang Chu, with hisanti-moralistic and anti-activist alternative of withdrawing from society intoindividual selfishness. Mencius in turn counterattacked the Yang Chu movementwith an explicit defense of the goodness of human nature; this openedup yet another slot in intellectual space which Hsün Tzu filled with theopposing doctrine that human nature is evil and requires the imposition ofsocial and ritual restraints. By the time of Mencius (ca. 300 b.c.e.), theintellectual network was beginning to take off into a self-conscious concernfor its concepts and its methods of argument. Oppositions were renewed on ahigher level of abstraction: idealism versus naturalism, sophistry versus transcendentstandards, the rectification of names and standards versus the aconceptualNameless of the Tao Te Ching.1The oppositions which eventually became philosophy began in the externalarena of military-political strife. Wars among the contending states maderegimes unstable and put a premium on alliances, and hence on diplomatscirculating in a cosmopolitan network along with reformers and politicalplace-seekers. External politics gave birth to an intellectual attention space,rising to higher levels of abstraction and dividing along inner lines of fractionalization.The inner focus of attention which constitutes an intellectual communitybecame autonomous as the community acquired a distinctive networkstructure: the intersection of multiple factions at a few key centers of debate.It is conventional to explain Confucianism by the breakdown of politicalorder in the Warring States. But the timing is not very close. Disintegration ofthe Chou dynasty into a large number of feudal states was already advancedwhen the Chou capital was sacked by an uprising in 771 b.c.e. Yet the firstphilosopher, Confucius, did not begin teaching until about 500. Around thistime the intensity of warfare escalated, and chivalrous ideals of knightlycombat gave way to ruthlessness and strategy. Armies expanded from relativelysmall numbers of knights to massive peasant infantries. States began to levylarge masses of workers to build roads and canals, clear swamps, and constructdefensive border walls. Along with this we find an upsurge of trade, the spreadof metal coinage, and tax collection by state officials. A new level of organizationcame into being, superimposed on the earlier society of independentclans and fiefs. Religion had been a state cult, legitimating royal authority.Now the structure of clan society was subjected to new geopolitical relations,a cosmopolitan arena that simultaneously replaced old symbolic frameworkswhile offering opportunities to mobilize movements beyond and across localregimes.The Confucians proposed to overcome both the warfare and the symbolic138 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsFIGURE 4.1. EMERGENCE OF CHINESE NETWORK, 500–365 B.C.E.:RIVAL CONFUCIAN LINEAGES, MOHISTS, PRIMITIVISTSInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 139strangeness of the period with a backward-looking doctrine of religious correctness.Confucius was harshly critical of dukes and lower-ranking nobleswho had too many dancers in their court ceremonies or too many carts in theirfuneral precessions (e.g., Analects 3.1.6). Not only were these usurpations ofthe ritual badges of rank, hence showing disrespect for the traditional authorityof the dynasty, but also such ceremonies could not have their proper magicaleffect. The Confucians extolled the reified attitudes of traditional ritualism, butin doing so they stepped outside the cocoon of primal naïveté. Theirs was thebeginning of a sophisticated defense of unsophisticated practice.The anthropomorphic Lord on High was reinterpreted as an impersonalHeaven (T’ien) or Destiny (T’ien-ming). The latter could also be interpreted asthe “Mandate of Heaven,” in this way turning supreme religious power intoa principle of retribution. Incorrect rulers—those who neglected the appropriatesacrifices and other forms—would lose a favorable Mandate of Heaven,and eventually be overthrown by a ritually correct dynasty. This lesson wasillustrated by accounts of the rise and fall of earlier dynasties (including somemythical ones) in the Book of History (Shu Ching), which was compiled duringthe first generations of the Confucian school. The Confucians could not helpsupplementing ritual correctness with a new inner dimension of morality:rituals must be carried out with the proper attitude of respect, and this attitudeshould permeate other aspects of behavior as well. In the morality tales of thebad emperors, drunkenness and sexual carousing took their place as sins alongwith neglect of the rites.Soon after the Confucians opened an intellectual space, the Mohists movedinto it with an oppositional stance. The law of small numbers was alreadyoperating. Confucius’ followers soon split into some half-dozen schools, differentiatedapparently on how much strictness they applied to ritual formalism.2 The Mohists created a more radical alternative, both doctrinally andorganizationally. Ceremonies, funeral processions, music, and other publicdisplays—the center of Confucian concerns—were condemned as expensesburdening the common people. Whereas the Confucians idealized the rituallycorrect founder of the Chou dynasty, the Mohists idealized the Hsia, a dynastyof primitive culture-heroes preceding the ancient Shang. For the Confucianethical obligation to family and ruler, the Mohists substituted an ideal ofuniversal altruism. In opposition to the impersonal cult of Heaven and Destiny,Mo Ti personalized Heaven as a god rewarding the righteous and punishingsinners. Whereas Confucius strove to keep the spirits at a distance, the Mohistsemphasized the existence of ghosts as avengers of evils done to them duringtheir lives. One of the Ten Theses of Mohism is a refutation of fatalism, whichMo Ti associates with some opposing factions. Mohism developed as oneextreme just as the other extreme was emerging inside Confucianism in con-140 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsnection with the new religious conception of T’ien-ming, or Destiny. As thedeterminism which goes along with a formalistic ritualism was brought to light,Confucianism engendered its antithesis, a rejection of the whole ritualismcomplex, with its associated intellectual justification.At this time what we call Confucians were not yet a cult around the personof their founder; their transformation into a new religion was to come later.The movement instead was simply called ju, “scholars.” These were the firsteducated men, self-conscious specialists in compiling and interpreting the ancientdocuments which legitimated both political authority and their ownclaims for employment. Traditional Chinese religion had no special class ofpriests. Kings themselves had carried out the major ceremonies, later usurpedby feudal lords in the manner of which Confucius was so critical. Adherentsof the Confucian movement were something like the beginning of a specializedpriesthood, offering themselves as advisers to the feudal lords on ceremonialmatters. The Mohists found a rival niche, forming a military-religious orderbound by commitments of loyalty to the death. Their organization is reminiscentof the orders of crusading knights in Christian Europe. The Mohistpractical strategy was to counter the evils of the Warring States by purelydefensive warfare, based on their expertise in fortification. This military organizationprobably did not last many generations, as the scale of warfare soonfar outstripped the numbers of Mohist troops.3 By the generation of Menciusand Chuang Tzu (ca. 320 b.c.e.), the Mohists survived only as an intellectualfaction. The fate of the rival movements was parallel. Confucians too wereunsuccessful in their political-religious reform. They became instead the archetypeof the intellectual: custodians of the texts. In both camps the originalpolicy doctrines became logically acute as an internal attention space tookshape.Other factions in the external arena of political policy contributed to thethickening web of argument, and thus to the emerging space of intellectualfocus. Yang Chu debated with Mo Ti’s major disciple. In these generations (ca.400–335 b.c.e.) a variety of thinkers offered alternative policies: return to“primitivist” self-sufficiency, or the autarky of the “agriculturalists.” On theopposite wing, others advocated an explicit concern for political solutions,including a “Diplomatist” school proposing a path to state security throughnegotiation and alliance.Diplomacy was more than one factional alternative among others. It wasbecoming a distinct profession, and the common basis for the careers of manyintellectuals of whatever stripe. The large number of feudal territories of theprevious centuries had been reduced to a moderate number of contendingstates, from perhaps 1,000 down to 14 by 480 b.c.e. (Eberhard, 1977: 47). Abalance of power emerged among the strongest states. The military-politicalInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 141plots and negotiations that linked them into a network of conflict was givingrise to an inner structure, which became the incipient intellectual community.4The Intersection of Rival Centers and Multiple FactionsAt the height of the Warring States period, military success or even mere safetydepended on a web of alliances. A coalition of Chao, Wei, and Ch’in armiesturned back the aggressions of Ch’i, the most powerful state, about 284 b.c.e.,then went on to counterattack by invading Ch’i. In 257 an alliance of Wei,Chao, and Ch’u defeated a Ch’in attack; again in 247 Ch’in, which was fastbecoming the biggest and most powerful state, was beaten back by the combinedarmies of five states. Courts had become places of discussion and debateamong visiting diplomats carrying proposals for alliances, together with domesticofficials and traveling scholars offering their services in either capacity;all of them circulated schemes for administrative reform, military strength,and/or religious blessings. Most of the reform schemes came to nothing.Despite the intellectuals’ failures in long-term policy, their skill in argumentwas made important by the salience of diplomacy. Such a figure as Hui Shih,whom we think of mainly as a paradoxer or propounder of abstract logicalINTELLECTUAL CENTERS IN THE WARRING STATES, 350 B.C.E.(Chi-hsia Academy is in Ch’i; P’ing-yuan court is in Chao)142 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsdistinctions, was given important political responsibilities. Other famous personswere known for their ability to argue convincingly on either side of aquestion; this was considered politically useful, although encouraging fears ofalliance-switching and palace intrigues. The movement of intellectuals anddiplomats from place to place, and in and out of various states’ service, fosteredcosmopolitanism; intellectual reputation became autonomous from servicesrendered.The earlier movements—branches of Confucian ju, Mohists, Yang Chu–style primitivists, and advocates of rural self-sufficiency—consisted of wandererswith no fixed intellectual bases. As we see in Figure 4.2, the growth ofphilosophy in a more formal sense took place as intellectual life settled down,largely at four overlapping centers (Knoblock, 1988: 5–11, 20–34, 54–64).The court at Wei, one of the powerful Warring States, in the center ofexisting China, began to patronize the Tzu-hsia school of Confucians about380 b.c.e. This continued for three generations. In the latter part of the century,the king gathered a notable collection of scholars at his capital, Ta Liang. HuiShih, the famous logician, served as prime minister and diplomat. Otherpersonages included the famous debater Shunyü Kun (39 in Figure 4.2), Mencius,and perhaps Chuang Tzu, a friend of Hui Shih. With the accession of anew king (ca. 320), the group dispersed; Mencius and Shunyü Kun went tothe Chi-hsia Academy. The Wei center reappeared several generations later (ca.270–260), when Prince Mou, himself something of a traveling intellectual,supported Kung-sung Lung and his circle.The powerful state of Ch’i, in the east, began to patronize scholars about350 b.c.e., perhaps in emulation of Wei. At the high point, around 320–300,this Chi-hsia Academy had its own Scholars’ Hall, supporting seventy-sixscholars with honored titles and emoluments. Intellectual life was becomingautonomous; scholars were not asked to participate in government but wereexpected to deliberate and propound. Hundreds of additional scholars gatheredto listen and take part. Because of the invasion of Ch’i in 284 the academydispersed, but ten years later it was reconstituted; in this period its mosteminent figure was Hsün Tzu, until around 265 Tsou Yen arrived and broughtto dominance the Yin-Yang philosophy.Yet another center was at the court at P’ing-yuan, under one of the princesof Chao, to the north. This prince was said to have patronized some 1,000scholars and retainers around 270–250. These included Hsün Tzu, who hadmoved over from the Chi-hsia Academy when Tsou Yen arrived; Kung-sunLung and other logicians; and Prime Minister Yü Ch’ing, who wrote a Springand Autumn Annals of Master Yü. Tsou Yen arrived here as a visitor too,beating Kung-sun Lung in debate, whereupon the latter retired to the court ofWei. Hsün Tzu, too, eventually left P’ing-yuan to take a position as magistrateInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 143FIGURE 4.2. INTERSECTING CENTERS OF THE WARRING STATES,365–200 B.C.E.144 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsfor the state of Ch’u. Ch’u was the large southern state, then on the frontiersof Chinese settlement, where Mohist logicians had for several generationsenjoyed support. Hsün Tzu was posted to Lanling in southern Shantung (theeastern seaboard), where he set up his own school. Here he attracted pupilssuch as Han Fei and Li Ssu. The Lanling school and its network offshootscontinued to be influential down to the beginning of the Han dynasty, whenits scholars dominated the intellectual life of the new regime, producing highimperial officials as well as the scholars who fed the system of state Erudites(Knoblock, 1988: 38–39).States came to find prestige in sponsoring intellectual centers and emulatedone another. Wei, Ch’i, Chao, and apparently Ch’u (with less emphasis on an“all comers” approach) had their centers; the intellectual stars circulatedamong them as local conditions changed. Even the “barbarian” and ruthlesslypractical state of Ch’in, on the western frontier, took as prime minister FanSui (271–265 b.c.e.), a famous debater and former diplomat in the service ofWei. In the next generation Lü Pu-wei, a rich merchant connected to the Chaocourt, maneuvered to become prime minister at Ch’in, and assembled at hisown expense a group of some 3,000 scholars.5 This group probably drewheavily away from the older centers at P’ing-yuan (in Chao), the Chi-hsiaAcademy, and Hsün Tzu’s center at Lanling, from which was recruited thearch-Legalist Li Ssu. The Ch’in state, as it conquered the rest of China in the220s, acquired a reputation as anti-intellectual, above all because of the burningof the books of rival factions engineered by Li Ssu in 213. Nevertheless,we ought to see this as an act of rivalry among intellectuals, one faction ofwhom had finally come to absolute power. It was the last act of a situation ofintellectual emulation, which had promoted creativity for half a dozen generationsuntil the structural independence which undergirded the competition wasclosed down to a single source.It was in this period of “the hundred schools” that Chinese intellectual lifewas most similar to that of Greece. The debaters moving among the courts ofthe Warring States remind us of the Sophists, many of whom were diplomatstoo, as well as refugees or participants in colonization schemes of the Greekworld. Greek philosophers were concerned not only with military alliances (thePersian wars, the Athenian and anti-Athenian coalitions, later the wars of theMacedonian and Hellenistic states), but also with internal factions of aristocratsagainst democrats. Greek tyrants, who played opportunistically on eitherside of this class conflict, were especially likely to act as patrons of philosophers,like some of the upstart ministers of Chinese states. In both China andGreece the external structure gave emphasis to public argument, and growingprestige to the intellectual community per se. In China this happened at thetime of the Chi-hsia Academy and its rivals; the comparable center was AthensInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 145from the generation of the Sophists on. In both places cosmopolitan andcompetitive networks broke through into abstract self-reflection.Originating Structures of Philosophy in China and GreeceThe substantive contents of philosophy are different in China and Greece; thesimilarities are at the level of the network structure. In both the law of smallnumbers was operative early, as multiple factions emerged to fill the newintellectual attention space. In both cases the precipitating conditions involvedpolitical pluralism, the cosmopolitanism of commercial development and literacy,and a breakdown of traditional religious practices.For the Greeks, cosmological doctrines first became the object of attention;the nature of the gods was considered, and the search was launched for theconstitutive elements of the physical universe. For the Chinese, naturalistic orproto-metaphysical questions took a back seat initially to political and ethicalquestions. Even when the intellectual community became more self-reflective,Chinese philosophers built on the cultural capital already accumulated alongthese lines. The Chinese entry point to metaphysical abstraction was thequestion of human nature: whether it is selfish and asocial (as apparently inYang Chu), naturally benevolent and therefore socially responsible (in Mencius),or naturally evil and in need of control by rites (Hsün Tzu) or coercionby laws (the Legalists). Even the development of a mystical cosmology inChuang Tzu and the Tao Te Ching was largely connected to questions ofwhether to withdraw from civilized society; in the twist associated with “LaoTzu” at the time of the Legalists, withdrawal was made the essence of socialresponsibility through the claim that the magical sage-king can order humansociety through perfect quiescence. The nearest parallel to the Greek cosmologyof elements emerged late, with the Yin-Yang and Five Processes doctrines ofTsou Yen (270 b.c.e.), and these too were connected with political questionsof the rise and fall of dynasties.In Greece, philosophical contents went through almost the reverse development,issues of ethics coming to the fore only after the intellectual communityacquired an internal density and hence a push to higher levels of abstractself-reflection. Although the physis-nomos debate among the Sophists is somethinglike the issue raised by Yang Chu, the question of human nature wasnever the focus of debate in Greece as it was in China. There is a roughequivalence between the continua of positions in each place. But the conventionalpolitical participation extolled by Aristotle and the Stoics falls far shortof the worship of ritual and tradition which anchored the conservative end ofthe spectrum in China. Toward the other end, the withdrawal into ataraxeiacounseled by Epicureans and Skeptics did not take on the mystical and magical146 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsconnections which we find in the tradition of Chuang Tzu and incipientTaoism; nor do we find Chinese debates over hedonistic suicide comparable tothose of the Cyrenaic school. By contrast, ethical debates in Greek philosophy(at least until the time of the religious movements of late antiquity) covered anarrower territory; from the Cynics and Stoics onwards, the issue was thepurity of the ideal of goodness and how much compromise there should bewith worldly and sensual goods—a spectrum of argument that never greatlyconcerned the Chinese.The underlying condition has to do with the different ways external politicalconditions shaped the starting points for the contents of philosophicaldiscussion. In Greece the state cults under the leadership of priest-kings wereundercut by the democratic revolutions between 700 and 500 b.c.e. The civiccults remained, though manned by citizens as part of their political duties, withlittle or no influence by a class of professional priests (Burkert, 1985; Bryant,1996).6 The volatility of military power among the numerous city-states preventedthe dominance of any particular state cult over the others. The inabilityof the state to monopolize the focus of religious attention was furthered by theresulting influence of non-state cults; centers such as Delphi, Olympia, andelsewhere depended on an “international” market of clients and gave considerableattention to private religious concerns (Fontenrose, 1978). For intellectualsin the city-states, career possibilities depended increasingly on the attentionof public audiences. The space of religious cosmologies became an arenain which secular intellectuals now competed for attention. G. E. R. Lloyd(1987: 56–70) points to the uniquely Greek combination of “innovations andegotism” resulting from this struggle for reputation. The pantheon of naturegods used as initial cultural capital was transmuted into philosophies of cosmologicalelements.Lacking city-states and democratic revolutions in China, intellectuals wereoriented toward the support of princely patrons. Drawing at first on traditionalcultural capital, scholars made the initial issue restoration of the old statereligious cult; the alternatives ranged from Mohist anti-ritualistic monotheism,to withdrawal from the state religion entirely, to infusions of peripheral magicalcults as answers to political legitimacy. Since they were appealing directly toauthoritarian regimes, Chinese intellectuals stressed the traditional legitimacyof the ancient religious cosmologies, and disguised whatever innovations theymade by reading them into ancient texts, even inventing the texts if necessary.Hence there are no “Presocratic” nature philosophers in China. Explicit philosophicalargument was confined to the realm of the newly forming state andthe relation of the individual to it.For the Greeks, religious legitimation of the state was never a grand issueto be pursued by abstract philosophy. Community rituals, although all-perva-Innovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 147sive, went on largely as a matter of practical conformity; occasionally philosopherssuch as Anaxagoras and Socrates were attacked by political enemies onthe excuse of offending against the cults, but the prevailing attitude of intellectualsdown to the Roman Empire seems to have been that religious traditionwas irrelevant to their concerns. For this reason, ethical issues in Greekphilosophy hinge almost entirely on the actions of the individual; even theadvocates of political participation saw this largely as an issue of how theindividual should behave, not a question of what was best for the state.7The similarities between Greek and Chinese philosophy are at the innerlevel of structural relationships within the intellectual community. The earlygenerations in each place stand in structural parallel. Thales, Solon, and theother “sages” of the founding generation were politicians known for their pithysayings and their lawgiving; they were leaders in the period of political reformbrought about by the overthrow of the old aristocracy (and of the associatedmonopoly of the state cults by priest-kings). These Greeks are parallel toConfucius and his students, and to such early “Legalists” as Shen Pu-Hai andShang Yang, whose overriding concern was political reform. The changes inChinese political structure followed a different path than in Greece—cruciallylacking the democratic revolution within the decentralized state system—butreflections on political disorder and religious change are common to both. MoTi’s disciplined organization, which proposed to take political matters into itsown hands, is parallel to the Pythagorean brotherhood, which won politicalpower in some cities of the outlying colonies. Differences in the external setting,its politics-religion nexus, started off the Chinese and Greek intellectual worldswith different problems; these heritages of cultural capital were elaboratedalong divergent tracks even as the networks developed in structural parallel.Both external and internal social conditions affected the contents of Chineseand Greek ideas; the external setting the topics and the internal driving theturn toward logic, argumentative technique, and conceptual abstraction whichwould go on in both places in the next period.In Greece the decentralized situation of warring states continued down tothe final Roman conquest about 85 b.c.e. Even then Rome never monopolizedintellectual life the way the centralized Chinese dynasties would from the Ch’inand Han onwards. The resemblance is most striking between China from about335 to 235 b.c.e.—the three generations from Hui Shih and Mencius, downto the Mohist Canons, Hsün Tzu, and Han Fei Tzu—and the five or sixgenerations in Greece between 500 and about 300 b.c.e. Intellectual life inboth places hinged around the emergence of what we might call “sophists,”or professional debaters. A network of argument gave rise within a couple ofgenerations to logicians and epistemologists, making discoveries about thenature of inferences and ideas. Contemporaries experienced the initial phase148 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsin this discovery of the abstract as the emergence of paradoxes. Hui Shih’sfamous statements—“a brown horse and a dark ox make three”; “the wheelnever touches the ground” (Chan, 1963: 234–235)—may constitute an argumentfor the unreality of distinctions in physical time and space; some of hisparadoxes about motion are similar to those of Zeno of Elea. Hui Shih alsoseems to have introduced the challenge of deducing a hidden object from thedefinition of its name (Graham, 1978: 62). Kung-sun Lung a generation laterargued more explicitly about names, forms, and substances, though he stillmade a splash with paradoxes such as “a white horse is not a horse.” Kung-sunLung appears to have been attempting to solve epistemological problems,distinguishing whiteness from stone and the seeing of the mind from the seeingof the eye (Chan, 1963: 242).8A new intellectual space opened up, and in keeping with the law of smallnumbers it was soon filled with opposing positions. Tendencies toward sophistryand idealism were countered by defenses of empiricism and naturalism.The formulators of the Mohist Canons in the generation after 300 b.c.e. cameclose to a Western-style empiricism in natural science and to Euclidean methodsin mathematics (Needham, 1956: 171–184). They made use of new conceptsof “a priori knowable” (hsien, probably introduced by Hui Shih) and “necessary”(pi), and went on to derive principles of ethics and geometry from stringsof definitions (Graham, 1978: 62–63). This constituted a certain parallel toPlato’s school, with its use of mathematics as a standard for grounding anon-relativistic ethics. From the Confucian camp, Mencius reacted to thedebaters, utilitarians, and anti-moralists by arguing for an objective ideal ofhuman nature and morality. Although his object was merely to preserve theConfucian faith, he was forced to adopt the concepts of logical debate, andthus was pushed into defending the conception of properties shared by concreteobjects (Schwartz, 1985: 258–265). Mencius’ intellectual tools could then beturned to still other applications. His substantive stance became the foil foryet another Confucian wing, no longer touting the intrinsic merit of ritualismbut making an explicit defense of naturalism in both ethics and logic, at thehands of Hsün Tzu. His pupil Han Fei took this naturalism into open revoltagainst the Confucian tradition.In propounding the doctrines of legalism, Han Fei was not simply takingadvantage of an opportunity in the external political situation for legitimatingthe centralizing policies of the rising power of Ch’in. Legalism also emergedfrom the inner dynamics of the intellectual world. Both Confucianism and thelarger array of intellectuals were discovering the alternative poles of idealistand naturalist standards from which to argue. Growing conceptual sophisticationalso stimulated and transformed cosmologies. Han Fei could take theopposite tack from traditional Confucians, and from archaizing primitivistsInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 149such as Chuang Tzu and the Tao Te Ching author, in criticizing the adulationof historical precedent; at the same time he borrowed from the newer metaphysicsby turning the concept of tao into a naturalistic principle of order inthe physical world.Compared to the Greeks, Chinese intellectuals of this time placed littlestress on the preeminence of metaphysical abstraction. Although there wereseveral arguments driving toward idealist or transcendental conceptions, therewas no move like that of Plato and his followers to identify levels of conceptualabstraction with degrees of metaphysical reality. The book later known as theTao Te Ching, which appeared under an archaizing pseudonym late in thisperiod, built upon the epistemological reflections of Kung-sun Lung and the“School of Names” for its conception of the Nameless. Here the greatestmetaphysical reality is attributed to what one might call the last word (or thelast non-word) in philosophical argument; and the Nameless is identified witha preexisting conception, the tao (way), as the inner principle of the naturaland social worlds.But this route toward an explicit metaphysics of abstractions does not goany farther. The stimulating effect of logic and epistemology on cosmology,characteristic of both the Greek classic period and the Chinese “hundredschools,” breaks off. It is here that we find a crucial difference between thetwo intellectual communities. The Greek community carried on its “argumentative”period for 12 generations, most famously from 500 to 300 b.c.e., withanother half-dozen generations of epistemological argument down throughCarneades, the Stoic logicians, and Aenesidemus’ skepticism. For the Chinese,the sequence was shorter: four or five generations at most, from Yang Chudown to Han Fei Tzu. Then external forces intervened to limit sharply theextent of debate within the intellectual world, with the unification of China bythe Ch’in and its successor, the Han dynasty. The opportunity to pile onsuccessive levels of reflection was cut short. The intellectual maneuvers thatcame next were much more constrained to appeal to non-intellectual audiences.Instead of pushing farther into epistemology and abstract metaphysics, Chinesephilosophy moved back toward lay concerns. What became in retrospect thedistinctively “Chinese” cast of philosophical ideas was formed in the Hanperiod of centralized authority by the fusion of intellectually generated abstractionwith externally conditioned political-religious ideology.Overcrowded Attention Space and the Generation of SynthesesJust as in Greece the outpouring of schools in the generation following Socratesresulted in overcrowding and instability of most lines of transmission, in China150 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthe upper limit of the law of small numbers was being severely strained byaround 300 b.c.e. In both cases we see a period of confident fractionalizers,pouring into a newly opened space for abstract considerations, taking upextreme positions and disdaining compromise with rivals. This is noticeableamong the Mohists of the time: the most tightly disciplined group of its day,it nevertheless had split into three factions (Chuang Tzu, chap. 33; Graham,1978: 22–24). Their disputes included logical and conceptual problems (“differenceand sameness,” “the incompatibility of odd and even”) which theytook seriously enough to call one another heretics. In the generation around250 b.c.e., the split had been mended by a new synthesis.9 The great work ofreforming their alliance, the Summa of the Mohist position, was the Canons.It has the conceptual acuteness, comprehensive scope, and systematization thatare characteristic of creativity in the synthesizing mode. The notion that the“Chinese mind” is incapable of abstract logical argument is refuted by theexistence of the Canons. This very ideology of interpreting Chinese historybecame possible only because realignment in the intellectual networks at thetime of the Han dynasty eliminated the Mohist tradition.The Canons’ approximate contemporary, the Tao Te Ching, is a synthesison the other side of the field. Playing on the same kind of oppositional appealas Chuang Tzu, it is a much more unified composition than the compilationlater put together under Chuang’s name. It shows more sophisticated consciousnessof its philosophical opponents, turning the tools of the School ofNames into a device for transcending names, and the techniques of argumentativesophistry into substantively meaningful paradox. It is also a political-religioussynthesis, weaving together the older primitivists and anti-ritualists withthe newer themes of occultist direction of the state. But whereas Tsou Yen’sYin-Yang school proposed to intervene on the magical-concrete level of divination,the Tao Te Ching incorporated a more properly religious mysticismwith its sage-ruler emanating cosmic powers, the te of meditative withdrawal.It is a mark of its synthesizing success that the Tao Te Ching was to becomea favorite of many subsequent factions; even the Legalists in the very nextgeneration could find a use for it in legitimating the smoothly operatingbureaucratic system of rewards and punishments that would allegedly makesociety operate as effortlessly as the tao in nature (Schwartz, 1985: 343–345).Part of the synthesizing success of the Tao Te Ching is its ability to be read inso many ways; as Holmes Welch (1965: Foreword) remarked, no translationcan be satisfactory because no translation can be as ambiguous as the original.It would be inaccurate to say that the author took a preexisting mysticism andwove other doctrines into it, for it seems clear that there was no explicitlyformulated—and thereby metaphysical—mysticism before this time. A philo-Innovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 151sophical mysticism, rather, was created by just this effort to forge a positionuniting and transcending a host of philosophical and political schools.The “hundred schools” were winnowing down. In addition to the Mohistand the Tao Te syntheses, two other important synthesizers were the naturalisticConfucianism of Hsün Tzu and the Yin-Yang/Five Agents doctrine of TsouYen. Hsün Tzu was another systematizer, in some ways reminiscent of the styleof the Mohist summists, whom he probably contacted on his sojourns in Ch’u.His school at Lanling was the center of the networks at the end of the WarringStates. With his multiple contacts throughout the factions of the intellectualworld (see Figure 4.2), Hsün Tzu was in good position to be a synthesizer. Hecoordinated concepts and laid out the relation among fields of knowledge ina fashion parallel to that other synthesizer, Aristotle. Hsün Tzu occupied themiddle of the field, maintaining naturalism but without the radicalism of theMohists; his followers were above all ju, epitomizing the archetypal Confucianrole of preserving the classical texts and defending the ancient rites.The most successful faction in gathering external sponsorship was theYin-Yang school. It too was a syncretism of the period around 265 b.c.e. TsouYen combined two different divination schemes, which apparently went backto the previous century: the ebb and flow of yin (dark, female, passive) andyang (light, masculine, active) with a cycle of five basic elements or processes(water, fire, wood, metal, earth). This seems reminiscent of pre-Socratic cosmologies,especially of Empedocles;10 but in this case Tsou Yen was lessoriented toward displaying a naturalistic cosmology, and more concerned todemonstrate an immediate appeal by using his device for political prediction.He produced an encyclopedic ordering of natural phenomena—rivers, mountains,plains, celestial bodies—progressing through the cycle of the elements.Human events were also cyclical, and hence the rise of fall of dynasties couldbe predicted. Tsou Yen made a great splash in the court debates, embarrassingKung-sun Lung at P’ing-yuan, and motivating Hsün Tzu to leave Ch’i(Knoblock, 1988: 11, 63). In sheer longevity of his ideas, Tsou Yen is one ofthe most influential figures in Chinese history.In the lineup of rival positions, the chief political philosophies up to thistime were polarized between the Confucians, who claimed that traditionallycorrect ritual would restore social order; and the Mohists, who advocated avirtuous military activism based on universal altruism. The intellectual dilemmawas that the Confucians were political ultra-conservatives advocatinga long-lapsed dynasty, while their religious stance (anchored against the Mohists)was detached and instrumental. The Mohists in turn were politicallyutopian radicals, but religious conservatives with their belief in benevolent andavenging spirits. Tsou Yen reshuffled the ingredients with a religious doctrinejustifying political change—indeed, precisely the opportunistic changes152 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsof power politics. At the same time, his occultist cosmology preserved theveneer of legitimation that the Legalists had stripped away with their blatantnaturalism.Centralization in the Han Dynasty:The Forming of Official Confucianism and Its OppositionThe crisis of overcrowding in the attention space had produced a wave ofsyntheses among the multiple factions of the late Warring States period. Synthesiswas accelerated still further by external conditions when the Ch’inconquest state and the subsequent Han dynasty centralized intellectual life. Therival centers which had promoted creativity were now reduced to a singlecenter under imperial patronage. Which intellectual faction would gain controlof the new material base? In the Ch’in, the Legalists had imposed theirhegemony. But the Han revolution had put them under a cloud. Tsou Yen’sYin-Yang school and other occult divination schemes remained popular. By thetime centralized Han administration was firmly established around 130 b.c.e.,Confucianism had made a dramatic comeback and was elevated to the soleofficial doctrine.All subsequent Chinese history has been written in the light of Confucian-HAN DYNASTY, 200 B.C.E.–200 C.E.Innovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 153ism, but its continuous hegemony should not be taken for granted. In the lateWarring States, Confucianism was one faction among many, and not thedominant one; nor was its position especially high through the first twogenerations of the Han. The Confucian ju maneuvered their way into powerthrough a series of moves on both intellectual and organizational terrain.The first move was to establish a tie to the divination practices whichappealed so strongly to lay politicians. At the time of transition between theCh’in and Han dynasties, when books of the philosophical schools werebanned, divination texts were exempted. They became the turf on whichintellectual schools scrambled for survival. One faction of Confucians adopteda relatively recent compilation of old divination records, and added commentaries,ascribed to Confucius himself, interpreting the hexagrams of broken orunbroken lines in terms of advice for the Confucian “superior man” (Graham,1989: 358–359). Within a generation or two the book was regarded as one ofthe canonical ancient texts, now called the Yi Ching—“Classic of Changes.”From this base in the divination camp, the Confucians next were able to absorbthe Yin-Yang school into a dominant synthesis. All others of the old WarringStates intellectual schools disappeared, leaving Confucian occultism in thecenter of the attention space.The material base was built up, first by restoring the cult of Heaven in thesacrificial ritual of the court. Later Confucius himself was deified. A periodicritual was established, offering homage to the emblem of their group identity,in effect putting Confucians in the position of ritual precedence. The doctrinewas developed that Confucius himself had held the Mandate of Heaven as defacto earthly ruler, and furthermore that there was a series of such sages,periodically reappearing, leading one to expect further such Confucian rulers.On the mundane plane, this ideology corresponded to the change by which theConfucians were turning from ju, custodians of ancient texts, into bureaucraticofficials claiming a monopoly on official positions in government. A stateuniversity was founded in 124 b.c.e. to train officials; by 5 c.e. it had grownto 3,000 students (CHC, 1986: 756).Confucian claims for ideological and administrative monopoly were idealized;reality fell considerably short. Only a start was made at an administrativebureaucracy recruited as a meritocracy of educated officials. Clans and noblefamilies still held sway in the provinces, and patrimonial politics remainedinfluential at court. Admission to the state university was not by competitiveexamination but by patronage of notables. The effects on intellectual creativityoccurred principally at the moment when the structure was first established.In the early Han, the court patronized official teaching by 70 Erudites, coveringthe range of texts and specialties which had come down from the WarringStates. Under the new emperor Wu Ti (r. 141–86 b.c.e.), the Confucians struck:154 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsfirst experts in the Legalist and Diplomatist texts were banned from governmentpositions; then in 136 b.c.e. the Erudites were reduced to five lecturerson what henceforward became the paramount Confucian classics (Knoblock,1988: 39–41).11 A Confucian synthesis was put forward by one of the Erudites,promoting simultaneously a divination scheme, a philosophical system, andthe new Confucian religion.The individual whose fame arose through this intellectual coup is TungChung-shu, although he was not alone in these maneuvers (CHC, 1986:709–710; Knoblock, 1988: 38–39). Pre-Ch’in Confucian secularism was submergedin Tung’s all-encompassing system of correspondences. The Five Agentsof the Yin-Yang school, not yet incorporated by the Confucian authors of theYi Ching Appendices, now were moralized into a social hierarchy: “Earthserves Heaven with the utmost loyalty. Therefore the five agents are the actionsof filial sons and loyal ministers” (Chan, 1963: 279). The cosmos was moralizedand the human order described as a series of correspondences with naturalphenomena. Building on the doctrines of Tsou Yen’s school, Tung propoundedhow each dynasty had its reigning element, its predominant color and quality;government officials should have four ranks because there are four seasons.These correspondences sanctioned establishing a bureaucratic structure, andclaimed for experts on natural portents a key place in government. All wrongdoingby human officials, according to this theory of correspondences, wasconnected to abnormalities in nature. Tung Chung-shu gave both a teleologicaland a mechanistic explanation of the weather and other natural phenomena,and incorporated many empirical observations along with references tomythical creatures. Confucian officials were to scan both human and naturalworlds for signs of abnormalities and correct them by ritual and administrativemeasures.The intellectual effect of this realignment was to bring philosophy down toa concrete and particularistic level. Divination systems bent philosophy to theservice of political legitimation and oriented intellectuals toward alliances withpolitical factions rather than toward the autonomy of intellectual issues. Thefirst Ch’in emperor adopted Tsou Yen’s system by taking water as the rulingelement of his new regime, replacing fire, the element of the Warring Statesperiod. In the early Han, intellectual life was dominated by successive imperialcounselors propounding cosmological views as to what element (fire or water)was the prevailing force of the new dynasty. The intellectual practice pioneeredby Tsou Yen and the Yin-Yang school now became Confucian practice as well.To this drag on the intellectual world were added the liabilities of divinationon the political side: since portents could be manipulated by all politicalfactions, such as aspiring heirs or dissident branches of the nobility, they couldprovide alternative legitimations carrying magical and emotional overtonesInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 155befitting an atmosphere of plots and coups. Divination schemes enjoyed adangerous popularity in the Han and in subsequent dynasties. Tung Chungshu,who surrounded himself with ritual pomp to the extent of lecturing frombehind a screen out of the sight of mere mortals, was exiled to the provincesfor his zealous advocacy of a divination scheme by which he attempted tomanipulate government policy.12The intellectual effects were not entirely destructive in the long run for thedevelopment of abstraction in Chinese philosophy. The synthesis of Confucianmoralism with the divination schemes opened the way for a Confucian metaphysics.The crucial development was the third appendix to the Yi Ching, theso-called Great Treatise, which asserted ceaseless change as the fundamentalreality of the universe. At the same time, the system of hexagrams composedof all permutations of strong (yang) and weak (yin) lines can be regarded asthe structure out of which the empirical world is formed, analogous to Heraclitus’logos shaping the flux of experience.13 The Yi Ching Great Appendix,along with several other extracts and commentaries from classic texts aboutthis time—the Doctrine of the Mean and the Great Learning, both developedfrom the Book of Rites—became the textual capital on which the Neo-Confuciansof the Sung dynasty were to develop a Confucian metaphysics.The centralization of ideological production in the Han reorganized thematerial practice of intellectual life. The imperial library was founded, staffedby officials whose task it was to define the paramount reality through compilingofficial histories and putting in order the texts that would constitutetradition. Any rival to official definitions of reality would also take the formof an encyclopedia or bibliographic collection. Collections of books and theirrubrics now crystallized identities, making up the “schools” into which allsubsequent historians have organized Chinese intellectual life. Inclusion orexclusion from a bibliographical collection had fateful consequences. Thecanon of Confucian texts omitted the works of Mencius and Hsün Tzu, whichconstituted a Confucian underground, and Mencius was not brought back intoprominence until the revolutionary upheaval promoted by the Neo-Confucians.Even in periods of centralization, what innovation did take place camein the form of oppositions, the usual driving force of intellectual life. Opposingdoctrines appeared simultaneously, contesting key points within similarmaterials. In the same generation when Tung Chung-shu was carrying outhis Confucian synthesis, an anti-Confucian position was organized. It graduallyacquired the label “Taoism,” although the term is anachronistic if weexpect it to carry particular metaphysical or religious connotations. There weretwo such oppositional developments. Tung Chung-shu’s contemporary Ssu-maT’an, the imperial historian, in organizing the official library classified thebooks into schools, coining the term “Tao-te chia” for a category of textssimilar to the Tao Te Ching.156 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsMore sharply in opposition was a group in the provinces, gathered aroundthe prince of Huai Nan (in the south below the Yangtze), in a collateral branchof the imperial family which resisted the move toward bureaucratic centralization.Prince Liu An patronized thousands of scholars and magicians, whoproduced an encyclopedic treatise, the Huai-nan Tzu, covering metaphysics,astronomy, government, the army, and every area of extant knowledge. ChuangTzu’s paradoxes and nature mysticism were turned into a cosmological sequence.Vacuity gave rise to tao, which gave rise to space and time, which inturn gave rise to material force, and then to the manifestations of the materialuniverse. There was a time before yin and yang, Heaven and Earth (i.e., thereceived cosmological categories), and even before non-being—thus going backbeyond the Tao Te Ching as well. This was not yet religious Taoism; the HuaiNan group attacked meditation and reinterpreted “non-action” as “no actioncontrary to nature.” Earlier traditions of mystical quietism and political withdrawalwere turned in the direction of political activism. When the prince ofHuai Nan rose in rebellion in 122 b.c.e., it was put down by an army led bya disciple of Tung Chung-shu (Woo, 1932: 30–31).The intellectual-religious identity of an anti-Confucian opposition persisted,even as Confucian hegemony at the centralized court was established.“Taoism” gradually crystallized as a distinctive collection of texts, outside theConfucian classics and their official commentaries. The Chuang Tzu was alsocompiled at this time, including its late syncretist chapters, perhaps at the HuaiNan court itself, perhaps in the oppositional group at the Han court aroundSsu-ma T’an (Roth, 1991: 86–93; Graham, 1991: 280–283). The Chuang Tzuremained somewhat to the side, since its anti-political stance and its idiosyncraticattitude about death did not fit with either the activist stance of theHuai-nan Tzu or the religious cult of immortals which became the center ofpopular Taoist religion.The most important identity was simply negative, an anti-Confucian opposition.Eventually “Taoism” became a bibliographic collection which tookunder its wing all the surviving bits of rival philosophies. By 300 c.e., Mo Tzuwas listed as a minor Taoist immortal, and his book was included in the TaoistCanon, along with such disparate figures as the Legalist Han Fei Tzu and (ina late forgery) Kung-sun Lung (Graham, 1978: 65–66). This was syncretismof the most external sort, with no effort to assert intellectual similarities beyondthe common property of being outside the official Confucian fold.After the defeat of the Huai Nan rebellion, what intellectual action therewas took the form of a split within Confucian ranks. In opposition to theConfucian religion, an Old Text school arose, initially a bibliographical movementcritiquing the newer occultist commentaries (the so-called New Textschool) and demanding a return to the original texts as they were before theburning of the books. The most prominent leader of the Old Text school wasInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 157the imperial librarian Liu Hsin; his network of teachers descended from LiuAn, the prince of Huai Nan himself (see Figure 4.3). Structurally the oldanti-Confucian opposition continued in the new opposition within Confucianism.Liu Hsin was joined by contemporary Confucian dissidents Yang Hsiungand Huan T’an, anti-occultist skeptics with connections to the mathematicaland other scientific work around this time.14 Two generations later, the mostradically secularist, anti-teleological Confucian appeared: Wang Ch’ung. Thiswas a period of two-sided struggle rather than a swing in the zeitgeist awayfrom occultism. It was in these same generations that the movement to deifyConfucius was at its height.15The struggle gave rise to little sustained creativity in Chinese philosophy.Figure 4.3 shows how sparse and broken were the networks of notable figures;little reflexive abstraction built up. On the level of political realities, both theNew Text and Old Text schools were tied to external allies, whose dynasticpolitical struggles they bolstered with rival prophecies from occult numerologyand portents (Gernet, 1982: 163–165). Even the most extreme of the “rationalist”anti-occultists, such as Wang Ch’ung, did little more than to lay downa negative position, implicitly linked to the occultism which constitutes itstopic.16 Confucian religion and Confucian rationalism set the lines of longstandinginternal opposition within Confucianism, in effect a division over thequestion of how much the scholars should mingle in the external politics ofreligious-political factionalism. It was an opposition on a low level of intellectualabstraction, anchored in the external world, promoting little autonomyfor inner developments in intellectual space.The Changing Landscape of External SupportsThe Han dynasty, especially in its earlier period, aimed at a totally controllingbureaucratic state, attempting to regulate the entire economy, providing publicworks, monopolizing manufactures and their distribution. Armies consisted ofconscripts armed and supplied by the state. The predominance of a civilianbureaucracy gave some basis for intellectual life, in the bureau of religious ritesand the imperial library, and an educationally credentialed profession of higheradministrators provided some positions for teachers. We have seen the limitationson intellectual life under these conditions. Most officials—there were120,000 of them by 100 c.e. (CHC, 1986: 466)—were narrowly concernedwith practicality or with political maneuvering; much of the innovativenessaround the bureau of rites took the form of particularistic cults, includingdivinization of Confucius. The expansion of the state university, which reached30,000 students by 125–144 (CHC, 1986: 756–757), was not associated withphilosophical creativity. We see again in later dynasties, especially the T’ang158 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsFIGURE 4.3. HAN DYNASTY TRANSITION AND FORMING OFOFFICIAL CONFUCIANISM, 235 B.C.E.–100 C.E.and the Ming, that the formal educational system can promote cultural traditionalismand rote learning rather than innovation.In the later Han this effort at autocratic state control of the economy, neverentirely successful, increasingly broke down. Peasant farmers generally becamedebtors and tenants of large private estates. State monopolies, which had beenoperated through the intermediaries of franchised merchants, were transferredto local administration and eventually into private hands. The centralizedbureaucracy continued in existence, perhaps even expanded, but exerted lesscontrol. Power struggles went on among the patrimonial household staff, thecourt aristocracy, and the various factions of central and local administrators;something like an educated gentry stratum was forming as education expanded,but its effective control was small. After 100 c.e. government revenuesfell, and the government became incapable of providing disaster relief in thecountryside. Peasant uprisings were organized around religious movements,using the cultural capital of the anti-Confucian opposition, and giving shapeto an incipient Taoist church. When the military resources of the large estatessurpassed that of the central government, the state broke apart.The “medieval” period of the next 400 years was one of political fragmentation.At first there were the warring Three Kingdoms, then a brief reunificationunder the Chin dynasty (265–316). The old Han capital at Loyang sawan upsurge of intellectual life at this time, somewhat misleadingly labeled“Neo-Taoist”; its carriers were the court nobility and what remained of aConfucian gentry or officialdom. The functions of the bureaucracy must havebeen nominal. The money economy largely disappeared; economic control wasin the hands of the large estates, and the ruler’s private estates near the capitalprovided most of his resources. The landed magnates collected their own armedretainers, including nomadic tribes recruited as mercenaries. When these militaryforces formed their own opportunistic alliances, the nominally centralizedstate was again destroyed. In this way armies of Huns took north China in309–316, with considerable devastation and loss of population. Many Chinesefled to the south, where an independent state was maintained until China wasreunified by the Sui dynasty in 589. South China underwent considerableeconomic development, but the military and administrative power of thecentral government was weak, and economic control was in the hands of largeautarkic estates. There were uprisings and civil wars throughout the period,and five nominal changes of dynasty. North China, by contrast, was frequentlydivided among warring states built on tribal coalitions of Huns, Turks, Mongols,or Tibetans. There was one period of fairly considerable unification inthe north, from about 440 to 530, when the Toba (Turkish) Empire subjugatedmost of the other northern states.The overall process was not so much a conquest of China by ethnic aliens160 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsas a fragmentation of military power from within. In the north, the tribalarmies usually became organized as allies in the power struggles of the largeestate holders, and their victorious leaders soon became part of the indigenousstructure. Their rulers inherited the problems of supplying and controllingtroops and of taxing the population; their military supporters tended to becomelanded magnates in their own right. At times there were reactionary “nativist”movements among tribal groupings who remained at the borders, but thesewere rarely successful against the organized forces of the center. Typically thenorthern states attempted to emulate the Han tradition of autocratic directionof the economy, but with only partial success. Some bureaucracy was reestablished,and Confucianism regained a foothold; intrigues among the palace staff,royal relatives, and court aristocracy were overlaid by ethnic factionalism; thepredominant trend toward cultural Sinification was complicated by a newreligious pluralism with the growth of Taoist and Buddhist sects.This was the period in which monasteries appeared, and eventually becamea new base for intellectual production. In the south, Buddhist and Taoist sectsunderwent considerable growth, patronized by emperor and aristocracy. Especiallyin the northern states, monasteries received massive grants of land, serfs,and slaves; in effect, the rulers used monasteries as agents in controlling andSECOND PERIOD OF DIVISION, 250 C.E.Innovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 161reorganizing the population, resettling devastated areas, and colonizing thefrontiers. Buddhist monasteries soon became the leading edge of economicgrowth; their wealth and privileges became objects of contention betweenlanded magnates and court factions.Religious factions converged on the center when government reunified.Military struggle eventually resulted in reunification under the Sui (581–618)and, after further civil war, the T’ang (618–900). There was a successful effortto rebuild the central administration and to regain civilian control over aconscript army. Revenue collection, public works, and state rituals were expandedin the Han tradition; professionalized Confucian administrators recruitedby a formal examination system once again began to expand theirinfluence. Their usual struggles with the palace servants and the court aristocracywere now complicated by patronage for Buddhists and Taoists. Battlesover the imperial succession often took on overtones of religious factionalism.Taoism and Buddhism had brief episodes as state-imposed religions. Moreusually, the panoply of state rituals took precedence, administered by Confucianswho were much more bureaucrats than priests. The structure hadbecome one of religious pluralism under the umbrella of a state administrationthat typically sought ritual legitimation simultaneously from all religionsand cults.When Does Rivalry Produce Creativity and When Stagnation?A conflict theory of intellectual life emphasizes opposition as the generator ofcreativity. But Chinese philosophy points up the pattern in which opposingfactions exist, sometimes for dozens of generations, without much intellectualchange. We see one such instance in the later Han, in the stagnant rivalrybetween the religious and scholarly wings of the Confucian school. After thedisintegration of the Han dynasty, the prevailing pattern becomes a broadthree-way competition among Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist camps. But forlong periods Confucianism shows almost no creativity; except for one generationaround 800 c.e. (see Chapter 6, Figures 6.1 through 6.4), we find nonotable Confucian philosophers until 1050, when the Neo-Confucian movementcomes alive for half a dozen generations. Buddhist philosophers monopolizecreativity for much of this period, especially from 400 to 900, thengradually tail off to around 1200, and produce nothing significant thereafter.Taoism shows intermittent religious changes during this time but with longphases of stagnation, especially on the level of abstract philosophy.Yet there were plenty of confrontations among these major positions. Therewas a lively struggle for patronage; Taoists and Buddhists especially instigatedintermittent purges, confiscations, and suppressions of each other. Intellectual162 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathschallenges were not lacking; debates among Confucians, Taoists, and Buddhiststook place at many courts during the period of fragmentation after the Han,during the centralized T’ang dynasty, and indeed down to the time of theMongol regime. The material underpinnings of intellectual life expanded whenan official examination system was established. In the T’ang and later dynasties,there were at times several such examination systems, for Buddhist andTaoist monks as well as for the state bureaucracy. All this one might expectwould have stimulated a great deal of philosophical innovation. But we findsurprisingly little outside of Buddhism.This material provides an opportunity to sharpen our theory throughcomparison. On many occasions structural conflict fosters philosophical creativity.We have seen it in China in the Warring States period, with both thepolarization of positions and the push toward higher levels of epistemologicaland metaphysical abstraction during the “hundred schools.” We see again abrief creative antagonism in the Three Kingdoms period after the Han downfallbetween Taoist and Confucian tendencies transmuted into a higher philosophicalplane. In Greece the same dynamic of innovative opposition and thesharpening of abstractions went on through 12 to 15 generations of debate;here too we found periods of relative stagnation, such as the loose andinconclusive syncretisms of Middle Platonism between 100 b.c.e. and 200 c.e.,and we witnessed the long-term conservatism of the Epicureans.Simmel’s sociological theory fits one side of the problem: conflict increasessolidarity and conformity within a group. Hence we would expect a time ofheightened conflict to be one in which opposing sides stick dogmatically totheir positions. The level of intellectual sophistication would decline as nuancesare driven out and positions of compromise are forced to join battle on oneside or the other. This is a pattern we find in intellectual life, as well as inpolitical, military, and personal conflicts. It helps explain why philosophers canlose higher levels of abstraction achieved by earlier generations and revert tocrude reifications, dogmatism, and name-calling rather than analytical advance.The lower rather than the higher level usually characterized the debatesamong Taoists, Buddhists, and Confucians.Our theoretical problem is to integrate this sub-theory into the overallpicture. We have abundant evidence that conflict is sometimes creative. Thelaw of small numbers gives a structural shape to this struggle. The issue is toshow what kinds of structural rivalry drive innovation by opposition, withassociated shifts upward in the level of abstraction and critical self-reflection,and what kinds of conflict have the opposite effect on intellectual life, producingstagnation and particularism. Part of the resolution lies in distinguishingtwo kinds of innovation: that which takes place on the particularistic level, asin the formation of religious cults and of anthropomorphic or magical doc-Innovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 163trines, and that which produces abstract metaphysical, epistemological, andethical conceptions.The underlying issue is the way in which intellectual life rests on materialand social supports of the surrounding world. The abstract level of philosophyis determined by the dynamics of inner networks among intellectuals. Here wehave a two-step causality: the external world is indirectly influential insofar asit supports those organizational structures which allow an intellectual networkto face inward upon its own struggles. This structural autonomy for intellectualsdoes not always exist. We have seen it build up during the pre-HanWarring States; we will see it again during the heyday of Buddhist philosophicalnetworks in the T’ang, and yet again in the neo-Confucian networks of theSung. At other times network autonomy is greatly diminished, for example, toa considerable extent during the Han, and during much of the following periodof political disintegration. During such times intellectual life does not necessarilycome to a halt. But its inner dynamics are greatly weakened. The contentof intellectual doctrines is now filled much more directly by the culturalinterests of the social classes and external institutions which support intellectuals.17There are, then, two sociological questions about the relationship betweenintellectuals and the external world. We can ask about the conditions underwhich the internal autonomy of the intellectual network is high, low, or atpoints in between. And we can ask about the patterns of intellectual productionwhen autonomy is low. The latter is the question of the effect of class cultureson intellectuals, the traditional topic of the sociology of knowledge. I haveargued that class determination is not a very useful theory for dealing with thehighest levels of creativity, the sequences of abstractions produced within thecore of the intellectual community; but class determination is applicable inperiods when structural bases of autonomy are absent. These are typicallyperiods of intellectual stagnation for an abstract discipline such as philosophy.What innovation occurs will be at a more concrete and particularistic level,such as the developments of anthropomorphic religions and magical doctrines.Let us be clear: periods of low intellectual autonomy can also have momentsof innovation; only they are not driven by the inner network structure of thefield. Left to themselves, intellectuals produce their own factions and alliances.Their competition over intellectual attention space leaves behind a trail ofabstractions which constitute the inner history of ideas. When intellectualautonomy is low, this self-propelling dynamic is absent. Instead, new ideasoccur at the moments when the class structure changes, when there are newexternal bases for intellectual life—new political conditions fostering religiousmovements, new economic and administrative conditions raising or loweringthe salience of court aristocrats, state bureaucrats, or propertied gentry, and164 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsother such shifts. These changes in external conditions are much more episodic.Intellectual changes, typically in the form of concrete religious doctrines or oflifestyle ideologies, come about when a new kind of structure is created. Oncein place, they are likely to remain conservative as well as concrete, like thepatterns of Taoist religion or gentry lifestyle. Once laid down, these are anchorsof intergroup conflict rather than items of cultural capital to be parlayed byintellectuals into an ever-lengthening sequence of conceptual abstractions.I have of course been speaking in ideal types. There is usually some overlaybetween autonomous intellectual networks and direct class influences. Eventhe most inwardly directed networks will incorporate some items of classculture, if only as starting points on which to play inner intellectual games.And direct class control of the intellectual world usually allows some degreeof structuring by the law of small numbers. The relative degree of innovationor stagnation of intellectual life at the level of abstract philosophies dependson the degree of inner autonomy along this continuum.The development of Taoism is a good place to explore the conditions oflow intellectual autonomy from lay influences, and the ways different classcultures affect intellectual life in such circumstances.From Anti-Confucian Opposition to Taoist Church“Taoism” is perhaps the most controversial category of Chinese historiography.The concept tao was the common property of virtually all intellectualfactions in the Warring States. In the Analects it is used to refer to the propercourse of human conduct, which the Confucians identified with the “way ofthe ancients” (Graham, 1989: 13). At the opposite pole, the Legalists also madeuse of the concept in grounding their doctrines. As late as 1200 c.e., themovement that we call Neo-Confucianism and that gained official status asinterpreter of the Confucian classics was known by its contemporaries astao-hsüeh, the tao study or school. The writings of Chuang Tzu and the TaoTe Ching are mixtures of various elements from the philosophical field of theirtimes and do not constitute a united front with the doctrines and practices ofthe contemporary magicians and shamans that might also be called “Taoist.”According to this line of reasoning, Ssu-ma T’an’s category “Tao-te chia”—“school of the Way and its Power”—which later became “Tao chia,” is merelya bibliographical classification. As Strickmann and others (Strickmann, 1979:166–167; Zürcher, 1959: 87; Sivin, 1978) have stressed, this kind of “philosophicalTaoism” is so different from the religious Taoism which built upduring the Han as to be incomparable. These scholars advocate reserving theterm “Taoism” for the Taoist church from 150 c.e. onwards. In particular theso-called neo-Taoism of the “Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove” and theirInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 165compatriots around 250 c.e. is a misnomer, and should be replaced by thecontemporary terms “Pure Conversation” (ch’ing t’an) and “Dark Learning”(hsüan hsüeh).This definitional strategy buys clarity in some areas at the cost of obscurityelsewhere. What we miss is the oppositional stance which crystallized whileConfucianism was becoming a state orthodoxy and a religion, and the fluctuatinglines of syncretism which took place within this oppositional united front.One can agree that “Taoism” is an anachronism before the time of TungChung-shu, though not after. But the elements that became “Taoism” preexistedthis time. Schematically, these included: (1) wu (sorcerers) and fang shih(shamans or spirit mediums), with their methods of curing the sick, prophesying,inducing trances and visions; (2) a practice of physical hygiene whichsought longevity through breathing exercises and gymnastics; (3) experimenterswith drugs and metals seeking an elixir of life; and (4) politically andphilosophically oppositional hermits and primitivists, ranging from the followersof Yang Chu up through the author of the Tao Te Ching (Welch, 1965:88–112).These doctrines represent quite different social settings and historical periods.The magicians and shamans were members of surviving aboriginal tribesor practitioners among the lower classes. The philosophical primitivists, bycontrast, were members of the educated classes. Where we hear of them puttingtheir ideas into practice, such as Ch’en Chung of the ruling house of Ch’i, ca.320 b.c.e. (Fung, 1952–53: 143), we find something like a utopian communityor “hippie commune,” quite different in spirit from the involuntary primitivenessof life among the peasantry. Some ideas and practices of the magicianspercolated into court circles by the time of the Ch’in and early Han. Magiciansvied for the patronage of superstitious and aging emperors; in response, courtintellectuals propounded new methods of physical hygiene and concocted newelixirs, intellectualizing and extending the themes of tribal magic. In thisevolving mix, the political and metaphysical themes of Chuang Tzu and theTao Te Ching stand apart from the crude materialist goals of longevity andphysical immortality for the individual.18 Nevertheless, all these elements werethrown together in compilations such as the Huai-nan Tzu (130 b.c.e.) andthe Lieh Tzu (ca. 300 c.e.). Such amalgamations gave pointed contrast to theofficializing doctrines of public morality and political-religious responsibilitythat made up the core of the Confucian position. The earliest group identityas “Taoist” was a coalition formed of disparate elements, which began just asConfucianism was putting together its synthesis with the cosmologies of thedivination schools.The Taoist church began to form in the late Han as factional struggles atcourt against the official cult of the Confucians, sponsoring sacrifices to a166 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsmultiplicity of gods and supernatural beings associated with immortality andother magic (Welch, 1965; Strickmann, 1979; Kaltenmark, 1969; Ofuchi,1979; Stein, 1979). As the dynasty disintegrated, rebel movements in theprovinces organized several kinds of Taoist churches, one of which ruled anindependent Taoist state in Szechuan for four generations. In the chaos offragmented states between 300 and 550, the several branches amalgamatedinto a formal Taoist religion. Its practices gradually shifted from magic andimmortality-seeking through drugs and alchemy to ritual worship and interiormeditation, as it built up a monastic organization and a set of disciplinary rulesimitated from Buddhism. Old texts supporting a “Taoist” identity, along withalchemical lore and new spiritual revelations expounded by the organizers ofmonastic Taoism, were syncretized into a textual canon during the 400s.Thereafter the Taoist canon stayed fixed; the printed version of 1447 has thesame rubrics it had a millennium earlier.The Taoist religion exemplifies the external determinism that limits innovativenesson the intellectual plane. Taoist intellectual life consisted mainly inelaborating doctrines directly connected with practice. These shifted only atthe moments when Taoist cultural capital was being adapted to appeal to adifferent external audience. Thus developed a succession of particularisticconcepts: changing the lineup of the pantheon which claimed a place in Hancourt patronage; health magic for a peasant-based movement at the time ofpolitical disintegration; doctrines of immortality-producing elixirs and exercisesfor a withdrawn gentry elite; scriptural regularities and meditative exercisesas a monastic organization developed. Doctrinal changes episodicallyfollowed changes in external conditions, but drove no philosophical developmentat a higher level of abstraction. Each succeeding version of Taoist religionstayed close to the class culture of its external audience.19What was specific to Taoist religious organization that had this result? ForBuddhism went a contrasting route. Although appealing successfully to layaudiences, Chinese Buddhism developed inward-looking intellectual networkswhich for many centuries drove just the kind of abstract intellectual creativitythat was lacking in the Taoist church. Consider the range of organizationalforms in Chinese religion: state-supported cults, carried out by governmentofficials (i.e., typically “Confucian”); monasteries, which might be nearly selfsufficientestates, or might depend on outside patronage; temples providingreligious ceremonies for the public in return for donations, and ranging fromgrand urban buildings to tiny village shrines; solo-practitioner priests or hermits,who usually made their living by dispensing medicinal or magical potionsand charms. Some organizational forms can be compared to a “Catholic”structure in which religious personnel are autonomous from the people andsupported by the government or massive property accumulation; others resem-Innovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 167ble a “Protestant” type in which priests are independent religious entrepreneursliving directly off public consumers. In the latter category we should addreligious secret societies, whose members were preponderantly or entirelylaypeople; these resemble in some respects the Christian lay brotherhoods ofthe late medieval period, differing in China in that their activities were particularlylikely to include political rebellion.Of all these organizational forms, the ones which were most often a basisfor autonomous development of intellectual communities were the monasteriesand the large urban temples. These “Catholic” types are the most characteristicBuddhist organizations. The Taoist church, in contrast, was predominantlybased on the “Protestant” style of decentralized religious organizations; andthese were the forms which brought the religion closest to the immediateconcerns of lay culture. This helps explain why Buddhist organization favoredabstract intellectual creativity so much more than Taoist organization did. Itsuggests, too, a reason why Buddhism lost its philosophical creativity at theend of the medieval period, when its great monasteries and temples lost theirautonomy. Popular salvation-oriented Amidaist Buddhism was structurallymuch closer to a Taoist organizational form; when Buddhism became reducedto little more than Amidaism, abstract Buddhist philosophy died out as well.We shall see a similar pattern in Europe in the development of scholasticphilosophy in medieval Catholicism, and the shift toward lay orientations inthe Protestant Reformation.The Gentry-Official Culture: The Pure ConversationMovement and the Dark LearningFor abstract philosophy, the most famous developments were not in religiousTaoism but in an interconnected group of gentry and officials which flourishedfor two generations around 235–300 c.e. This was the last occasion in Chinesehistory when there was any creativity on the purely philosophical side that hada significant connection with Taoism. Later Neo-Confucianism would absorbphilosophical Taoism so completely that there was nothing left but the religiousside, with its particularistic practices. Although the earlier movement hasusually been labeled “Neo-Taoist” or “philosophical Taoism,” the questionhas arisen whether it is Taoist at all. It included the themes of individualisticwithdrawal from the duties of conventional society, metaphysical mysticism,and non-action (wu-wei); and it explicitly developed its cultural capital fromthe Tao Te Ching, Chuang Tzu, and similar texts. All this fits our conventionalpicture of “Taoist”; indeed, it is the “Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove” whobest define our retrospective image of what a Taoist should be.Yet this was very different from the religious Taoism forming at the same168 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathstime, and antagonistic to it on key points. These philosophers and poets hadno interest in the religious pantheon or the doctrine of immortals; though somewere interested in alchemy, their cult of wine drinking and sexual carousingwas directly contrary to the puritanical hygiene sects, with their efforts tocontrol internal bodily processes. Moreover, these “philosophical Taoists” wereprecisely in the milieu of court Confucianism. They were educated gentry,whose culture was now taking on the pattern in which Confucianism controlledthe official part of one’s life, while a kind of aesthetic hedonism, legitimatedby texts that were now called “Taoist,” guided one’s leisure and retirement.The organizational basis of these movements confirms their connectionwith Confucianism. The term “Pure Conversation,” or ch’ing t’an, implyingphilosophy for its own sake, came directly from the Old Text school, theConfucian rationalists who opposed both the Confucian and the Lao-Huangreligions and occultism at the Han court. As the Han dynasty disintegrated, athousand or more of these scholars congregated at Ching-Chou in Hupei underthe sponsorship of the local governor (Demiéville, 1986: 826, 830; Rump andChan, 1979: xx–xxi). In the next generation, the libraries of major Confucianscholars connected with the Ching-Chou group passed via family inheritanceto the young aristocrat Wang Pi. Notable for erudition at an early age—richin cultural capital when few others had access to such texts—Wang Pi formulatedhis own reinterpretation of the classics, beginning the so-called school ofDark Learning (see Figure 4.4).The time was one of political decentralization. The money economy largelydisappeared; salaries were paid in silk or grain, and trade took the form ofbarter. At first China had divided into three states. Then in 263 the northernstate of Wei conquered the southwest state (in Szechuan) and in 280 thesoutheast state, bringing about a brief period of reunification (280–307). Itwas around the capital of the northern state of Wei (subsequently named theWestern Chin dynasty), continuing at the old Han site of Loyang, that all thenotable philosophical activity took place. The religious sects of Taoism werepredominant in other regions: the Five Pecks of Grain cult formed in the west;the alchemical sects and later the development of Taoist monasticism and thechurch pantheon were in the south.The northern state was politically unstable. Internally it was wracked byassassinations and coups among the leading families; externally it was subjectto inroads of barbarian tribes from the north and west, who ultimately overranthe dynasty in 309–316. The decay of the central bureaucracy at this time helpsaccount for the decline of Confucianism, and hence its willingness to syncretizewith other intellectual positions. Moreover, as the internal situation changedwithin the intellectual community, the interests of Confucian scholars turnedin an entirely new direction. The skeptical rationalists of the Old Text schoolInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 169lost their opposing anchors—the court religions—when the Han fell; now theirscholarship was turned loose in free space. It soon developed its internaloppositions.The “Pure Conversation school” turned toward an elitist, aesthetic hedonism,specializing in witty repartee, paradoxical sayings, wine drinking, sexualFIGURE 4.4. LATER HAN DYNASTY DISINTEGRATION AND THEDARK LEARNING, 100–300 C.E.170 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsaffairs, and other behavior scandalous to Confucian mores. The notorious LiuLing (ca. 221–300) used to go naked in his house. To a shocked Confucianvisitor he retorted, “The world is my house, and these walls are my garments.What, then, are you doing standing in my pants?” (Fung, 1948: 235). Liubelonged to the group called the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, membersof the upper gentry who met to drink, write poetry, and appreciate the fleetingnessof beauty on their country estates outside the capital, disdaining theconventional life of the court. In the next generation younger relatives of thisgroup indulged in a nudist circle as well as in sensual extravagances andintellectual witticisms. One style-setter would practice ch’ing t’an (pure conversation)“while he held in his pale hands a feather-duster with a jade handle,with which to sweep away, symbolically, the dust of this vile world” (Balazs,1964: 248–249). Yet these were members of the ruling aristocracy, includinggenerals, officials, and relatives of the ruling houses.In intellectual opposition to the Seven Sages was another group which alsodrew upon Taoist cultural capital, but made an explicit effort to combine itwith Confucian orthodoxy. The school of Dark (or Mysterious) Learning(hsüan hsüeh) was a network of Wei state officials. Ho Yen (d. 249), a Weiminister, synthesized yin-yang cosmology and Taoist ontology, giving a rationalexplanation of the paradoxes of the Tao Te Ching. His protégé Wang Pi(226–249), another Wei minister, wrote influential commentaries on both theTao Te Ching and the Yi Ching, bringing together the Taoist sacred text withthe Han Confucians’ divination classic. Wang Pi’s philosophy might be regardedas a set of abstractions designed to unify these positions by removingboth from the level of religious practice or particularistic portents onto anontological plane in its own right. Wang was not so much a mystic as apractitioner of metaphysics. With Wang Pi the philosophical community builtto a metaphysical level that had been seldom touched in China, and it was thiswhich gave such work the reputation of being a “dark” or “mysterious”learning.Wang Pi developed in an original fashion a metaphysical interpretation ofTaoist non-being (wu-wei). One cannot put non-being on the same plane asbeing, even as its opposite. “The cessation of activity always means quiescence,but this quiescence is not something opposed to activity. The cessation ofspeech means silence, but this silence is not something opposed to speech”(quoted in Fung, 1952–53: 181). But this original non-being, pen-wu, is notan emptiness on which a meditator might focus. It is, rather, pure being in thesense of original substance. Commenting on the Yi Ching and its ConfucianAppendices, Wang Pi argues that the hexagrams represent not concrete objectsof predictions but principles of the multiple things; behind these in turn is aunity transcending multiplicity, which in a sense may be regarded as theInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 171referent of Taoist non-being. Yet it is a substance and is permeated by principle,li, which governs everything down through the multiplicity of things. Being isthe functioning of the original substance; but regarded apart from its functioning,it is a purity that can be thought of as non-being. Wang Pi’s philosophy,interspersed as commentaries on earlier texts, is not developed very systematically,but it shows unmistakably the push toward a consistent metaphysicalinterpretation to overcome the paradoxical tone of the Taoist classics.The intellectual community at midcentury had become dense and competitive.One faction (Wang Pi, Wang Tao, Ouyang Chien, and others) maintainedthat ideas can be fully expressed in words, while an opposition led by YinJung defended wordlessness. Here we find an epistemological debate of thesort rarely reached in Chinese philosophy. Wang Pi seems to have made themost sophisticated formulation. He distinguishes ideas as a realm that can begrasped by means of symbols (such as the Yi hexagrams) and words; once thewords and symbols have served their purpose, they can be dispensed with(Fung, 1952–53: 184–186). Wang seems to have recognized the nature ofabstraction in its own right, beyond the symbols through which it is expressed.Having clarified this distinction, he holds that, contrary to Taoist mysticism,words and symbols are completely adequate to express ideas. In conjunctionwith other remarks in which both non-being and the original state of theuniverse are identified with the mind (Rump and Chan, 1979: 109; Chou YiCommentary, quoted in Fung, 1952–53: 181), this suggests that Wang Pi seemsto have been considering a position in the direction of a Platonic idealism.There was a concerted effort to redevelop the cultural capital of the variouspre-Han texts as consistent philosophical positions. At this time were producedthe first major editions and commentaries on the Chuang Tzu, as well as thecompilations of reconstructed (or forged) classics, the Lieh Tzu and the YangChu, representing the opponents of the older Confucian tradition. The argumentsof Hui Shih and Kung-sung Lung and of the Mohist logicians were alsorevived, and played a part in philosophical debate; they were attacked by WangPi and defended a generation later by Kuo Hsiang. Independent rationalistsand skeptics flourished, along with developments in mathematics and empiricalscience. What we find (visible in Figure 4.4 as the biggest network cluster infour hundred years) is a dense, competitive intellectual community, in whichthe major philosophers have direct connections with their opponents, andvertical chains across the generations go on from the Confucian rationalists ofthe late Han down to the early 300s. These exemplify the structural conditionsfor creativity on the level of abstract philosophy, in contrast to the philosophicallystatic rivalries or at best particularistic religious developments in thesurrounding centuries.The metaphysicians of this period are much more than “Neo-Taoists,”172 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthough they built on the philosophical texts that we may call the Taoisttendency within the late Warring States period. This was a community oftextual scholars who revived much of the full range of texts as of about 250b.c.e., and went on to develop them on an intellectual plane. It is as if thesethinkers picked up where the intellectual community left off its internal discussions,before the Ch’in and Han states narrowed the issues down to religiousand occultist themes appealing to lay politicians. The purest intellectuals of theHan, the Old Text school, had been able to do little more than keep up anideal of scholarship and skepticism. Now, as an untrammeled intellectualcommunity formed again, metaphysical and epistemological dimensions wereexplored in their own right as never before.The “Taoist” philosophical classics became central for this group becausethey were a springboard for metaphysical discussion. There is some resonancebetween the older tradition of withdrawal and nature primitivism and theaesthetic hedonism of the Seven Sages type (although there is reason to suspectthat they were not as anti-political as the ideology makes them out to be). Themetaphysics of the “Dark Learning,” by contrast, was largely formed inopposition to mysticism. Wang Pi, Hsiang Hsiu, and Kuo Hsiang all declaredthat Confucius was a greater sage than Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu—because henever talked about non-being but manifested it in action (Fung, 1952–53:170–173). Ho Yen and Wang Pi interpreted the Confucian classics in Taoistterminology, and Hsiang Hsiu and Kuo Hsiang interpreted the Chuang Tzu ina Confucian spirit. All these men were government officials, pursuing a synthesisof rationalistic Confucianism with the classic Taoist philosophers. Theirwork exemplifies the creativity of structural realignment, in which the effortto combine positions seriously defended in the intellectual world forced themto develop new levels of conception.The last of the group, Kuo Hsiang (fl. 290–310), takes this the furthest.20For him the nature of the universe is change; hence it is foolish to worship thedoctrines of the past, such as Confucian ceremonies which no longer meet theneeds of the time. Kuo attacks religious beliefs in a creator, as well as the searchfor magical methods of prolonging life, and even the practice of meditation,declaring that the sage is not one who “folds his arms and sits in silence in themidst of some mountain forest” (Chan, 1963: 327). Kuo instead is a naturalist.Tao now gives way as a ruling principle to nature (tzu-jan), a spontaneouslydeveloping principle immanent within things themselves. Moreover, Kuo doesnot stand pat with the stance of the Dark Learning of the previous generation.Philosophical arguments were reaching a new level of acuteness: ontologicalclaims were no longer merely asserted but were being scrutinized in terms ofa newly developing standard of logical analysis.Kuo attacks Wang Pi’s doctrine that being comes from an original substanceInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 173or condition because that argument leads to an infinite regress. In an argumentsimilar to Parmenides’, Kuo states that non-being can never become being, norcan being become non-being. This leads him to a general denial of ultimatecauses, as nothing can (in an absolute sense) produce anything else. Kuo seemsto have considered this from several angles. The whole universe is the conditionfor everything within it; and every item, no matter how insignificant in itself,is necessary for everything else to exist. Moreover, everything is imperceptiblychanging. “Therefore the ‘I’ of the past is no longer the ‘I’ of today” (quotedin Fung, 1952–53: 213). At the same time, Kuo asserts that nothing canautonomously determine anything else: “Things are what they are spontaneouslyand not caused by something else” (Chan, 1963: 335). Kuo Hsiangcombines metaphysical aspects that recall both Parmenides and Heraclitus inthe same system. But instead of reconciling the inalterability of being with theomnipresence of change after the fashion of the Greek solutions, Kuo finds adifferent resolution. It is neither the atomists’ substance with its combinations,a Platonic distinction among realms of ideal being and empirical becoming,nor an Aristotelean mixture of matter and form. Kuo Hsiang instead deniesthe absoluteness of being, letting reality reside in the phenomenal flow of thewhole universe, incessant but necessary in its patterns. Paradoxes like those ofChuang Tzu and the Taoists arise from the partial viewpoint of a single actorin the universe; logical consistency lies only in grasping the whole.Class Culture and the Freezing of Creativityin Indigenous Chinese PhilosophyIn the generations connecting Wang Pi and Kuo Hsiang, Chinese philosophyopened up a realm of abstract philosophy encompassing epistemology andmetaphysics at levels comparable to the most intense periods of the Greeks.The external conditions which supported this intellectual structure wereephemeral. The creativity of the Pure Conversation and Dark Learning camefrom a conflict between class cultures. Neither the leisure gentry culture northe bureaucratic administrative culture by itself fostered creativity in the realmof abstract philosophy. Intellectual creativity moved forward only when thesetwo structural bases were in a conflictual balance, with both components linkedtogether in the same network, such as existed around Loyang from about 240to 300. Here we find the typical creative structure of multiple bases intersectingat a geographical center. Typical, too, is the pattern of creativity by opposition.The Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove and their followers developed aniconoclastic aestheticism against the Confucian proprieties of those holdingoffice. The Dark Learning was developed among officeholders counterattackingthe Taoist ideology that legitimated withdrawal. Kuo Hsiang, himself a high174 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsofficial and participant in political intrigues, held that the sage is one whogoverns by “non-action” only in the sense of spontaneity in one’s social role.All social activities, including politics, are natural, and withdrawal from publiclife is itself an artificiality.It is worth stressing that creativity here was not a clash of class culturesalone but a contest of real structural possibilities contained within the sameinterpersonal network. Hsiang Hsiu, whose ideas Kuo Hsiang carried on, washimself a member of the Seven Sages before withdrawing to take public office:here the multiple bases intersected in a key individual. Refusing office andwithdrawing to one’s estate was part of political bargaining over conditions ofpower. Hsiang Hsiu thus aroused considerable resentment within the groupafter he ended a long holdout against taking office, especially because of theswitch in political loyalties involved (Demiéville, 1986: 834). Situated in thisdensely balanced network structure in which no single group exercised power,the conflict of class cultures gave impetus to a higher level of struggle overintellectual space; and this in turn resulted in epistemological and metaphysicalexplorations on a new plane.Philosophical creativity came abruptly to an end when this structure wasdestroyed. It is not merely that Kuo Hsiang was (in all likelihood) killed in312 in the Huns’ conquest of north China. A good many other philosophershad been killed earlier: Ho Yen in a coup in 249, Wang Pi the same year at age24, and three of the Seven Sages in dynastic violence around 265 (Demiéville,1986: 830; Balazs, 1964: 234–236). Until the final conquest, all this externalconflict was part of the conditions which made creativity possible, and newintellectual leaders took the place of those who died. The weakness of thegovernment both gave autonomy to the gentry on their estates and weakenedthe bureaucratic niches of traditional Confucianism. The cult of Confucius asa state religion had no political strength in the absence of an extensive administrativeclass when central control of the economy, public works, and militarylogistics had disappeared. By the same token, the secular scholars lost theirorganizational base with the decay of state schools and examinations. Inthemselves, both religious Confucians and scholar-bureaucrats were conservatizingforces on the intellectual plane; only when they competed from a positionof weakness against other cultural groups were they aroused into creativity.This creative balance was wiped out with the downfall of the Western Chindynasty. Military devastation was not the ultimate problem, for a number ofstates soon reestablished themselves. For the most part these were states withweak central administration, and power was in the hands of militarily autonomouslanded estates. It was under these circumstances that the gentry culturebecame established. Poetry writing, calligraphy, and painting became popularentertainments, developing especially from about 300 c.e. onwards. The mostInnovation by Opposition: Ancient China • 175famous calligraphers and the first great brush-stroke artists in Chinese historyappeared in the 300s. A good deal of creativity took place in these realms, butit was a creativity that cut in an aesthetic direction antithetical to the developmentof formal and abstract philosophy. In this respect the situation resembledMuromachi Japan and Renaissance Italy, where the means of cultural productionwere under the decentralized control of lay-oriented aristocracies: greateras in the arts but antithetical to abstract philosophy. When China reunifiedunder strong governments, this gentry culture remained a class basis for oneversion of intellectual life, and correspondingly an underpinning for conservatismin philosophy.The metaphysical advances of the Dark Learning were a hybrid of Confucianscholarship with this emerging gentry culture. When Confucian administrationwas reestablished in the strong dynasties, this philosophy was notabsorbed into orthodox Confucian scholarship. The scholars instead went backto the Han rationalism, leaving abstract philosophy to be carried along, if atall, as part of the opposition grouped under the rubric of “Taoism.” But Taoismwas now an organized church concerned primarily with scripture and practice,with hardly any philosophy at all. No doubt all the ingredients were presentfor indigenous Chinese intellectual traditions to regroup into a conflictualbalance that might drive philosophy onward again.But now there was a new player in the game: Buddhism. With its networkof economically powerful monasteries and its internal hierarchy of trainedspecialists, Buddhism was organizationally much more powerful than indigenousChinese institutions as a basis for intellectual life. And in the realm ofideas, it imported traditions of abstract philosophy built up over more than20 generations of dense competitive networks in India. It is not surprising thatBuddhism should hurtle into the forefront of philosophical activity in medievalChina. In this new field of intellectual forces, Taoist priests, Confucian officials,and gentry alike were thrown on the defensive, reinforced in their conservativestance in the realm of abstract ideas. Opposition shapes intellectual life in twodifferent ways: inside the dominant faction, by splits which drive innovationat higher levels of abstract reflexivity; and in the external relations betweendominant and defensive camps, by forcing the latter into the siege mentalityof name-calling and a focus on emblems of identity which keep ideas fixed andconcrete.