CHAPTER 5£External and Internal Politicsof the Intellectual World: IndiaWith India we round out the world’s three great indigenous intellectual traditions.For all the differences in atmosphere, there is no need to transpose ourtheory into a different key than for Greece and China. In India the dynamicsof conflict, both inside and outside the intellectual world, stand out with architectonicclarity. Social conflicts affected the fluctuating strengths of Vedic,Buddhist, Brahmanical, and devotional religions; inside the intellectual networks,conflicts among the subfactions of these religions shaped the pattern ofphilosophical creativity. India is a particularly good place to observe thetwo-step causality which governs intellectual life: external politics favors oneor another organizational base within which intellectuals build their networks;inside the dominant base factions divide to take up the lion’s share of the spaceavailable under the intellectual law of small numbers, while factions on theweakening side ally into syncretisms. The philosophical schools of India developedagainst one another, and the background for their struggles was set bythe sociopolitical dynamics behind the rise and fall of religions.An India driven by conflicts goes counter to the image prevalent not onlyamong Westerners but among Indian thinkers themselves. We have been taughtto think of India as essentially static, even “timeless,” under a perennialotherworldly mysticism. The image had to be created. It came about througha series of events: the destruction of medieval Buddhism, which had anchoredthe first great round of debates; the tactic of archaizing one’s own tradition toelevate its prestige over that of factional rivals; and the predominance, in thecenturies since 1500, of popular devotional cults of an anti-intellectual bent atjust the time when Hindu scholars were in a syncretizing and scholasticizingmode in defense against alien conquerors. The result has been that the acuteand extremely varied intellectual developments of the Indian Middle Ages wereobscured, along with the dynamics which produced them. Among Westernscholars, Indian philosophy is one of the great undiscovered histories of ideas,as technically sophisticated as European philosophies through quite recent177centuries. The cultural history of India is the history of struggle on multiplelevels, which eventually brought about almost total denial of its pathway.In what follows we move from the outside in. We look first at the outerlayer of causality, the historical patterns of Indian state formation; then therise and fall of religions tied in different ways to political and economicpatronage; and finally the rise and fall of factional oppositions within theintellectual attention space which shaped the contents of philosophies.Sociopolitical Bases of Religious AscendanciesIndia historically is the land of weak states. India’s complicated political historycan be summarized as a series of cycles between expansion of dominant statesand fragmentation into many small warring kingdoms. Most of the time thecentralizing swings of the pendulum did not reach as far as a single hegemonicstate, but only simplified to a balance of power among a few large regionalkingdoms, which held sway for a while before disintegrating.1 And even whenstates held military control over considerable territories, they were typicallyrather weak internally. Rulers had difficulty extracting revenue, and as timewent on, they became even weaker as control over the legal system andproperty relations was lost to the Brahman caste.Two underlying causes of this weakness are geographical dispersion andgeopolitical vulnerability. Early India was a frontier land of migrant agriculturalists,moving down from the northwest into sparsely populated jungles.When the fertile plains of the Ganges were settled around 600 b.c.e., thebuildup of population and economy allowed military conquest states to form.People again escaped the cage, spreading civilization to the south and east,where coastal and trading states grew up to counterbalance the peasant-basedextractive economies of the north. Cycles were set in motion which reinforcedthe weakness of Indian states. To the northwest, a corridor to distant populationzones allowed intrusion and conquest by military forces organized on thestate patterns of the Mediterranean and Middle East, from the Macedoniansin the 320s b.c.e. through the several waves of Muslim armies after 1000 c.e.Indian states had difficulty mustering resources to match the invaders becausetheir control over property was weak. Increasingly the social-religious patternwhich was becoming “Hinduism” undermined state control; and state weaknessin turn enhanced the local power of the Brahmans.The Rival ReligionsThe several phases and competing patterns of Indian religion are correlatedwith these changes of the state. The early Vedic religion was the ritual organi-178 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsGANGES STATES, 500 B.C.E.(From Davies, 1949, p. 7)External and Internal Politics: India • 179zation of the frontier-settling clans. The incipient growth of strong statespromoted symbiosis with monastic religions, above all Buddhism, which accumulatedlanded property. Jainism, beginning in the same milieu as Buddhism,found its niche in the coastal trading states. Hinduism emerged as a religionof the second diaspora, centered on families of landholding priests. Settling inthe peripheries among pre-agricultural tribes, the Brahmans and those whoemulated them molded ritual around exclusionary lines of racial purity ratherthan political hierarchy. A later phase set in when monastic religion declinedalong with its strong state patrons; now Hinduism recolonized the northernhomeland, transforming itself into quasi-monastic orders and mass religiousmovements of its own. In the last act, native religions were overlaid by Muslimconquerors. Let us examine each of these phases in a little greater detail.vedic cults and their breakdownIn the old Vedic period, incipient state organization consisted of the frontiersettlingkin group under a war leader, among whom some families acquiredhereditary succession to the kingship. The Brahman priests ritually officiatedat tribal ceremonies including the consecration of kings, making up a Brahman-political alliance. In the early Upanishadic period (from about 700 b.c.e.continuing perhaps down into the 300s or later in some places), this alliancebroke down; the validity of the Vedic ideology was questioned by competingreligious and philosophical practices, while kings dispensed with Brahmanlegitimation, patronized religious questioners, and sometimes claimed theirown superiority in the spiritual field. States consolidated power by militaryconquest and political coup, and by ruthlessly breaking the bonds of familyand clan loyalty, dispensing with religious legitimation.2 The prestige of theVedic priests declined as their political base disintegrated, spurring the formationof rival movements.Among these movements emerged two well-organized religions: Jainismand Buddhism. Both were centered at first in Magadha and Kosala, which isto say the strongest of the consolidating states, where their founders had royalconnections (Mizuno, 1980). From now on for the next thousand years,Buddhism was a strong contender for state patronage, scoring its most spectacularsuccess in the first great conquest state, the Maurya Empire. Whatemerged as Hinduism—a renovated Brahmanism but with social bases whichlimited the power of rulers—came later and in opposition to Buddhism; itsstrength was above all on the frontiers, where states were weakest.What does it mean to say that a given religion is “supported” by a politicalregime? In India there was virtually never a question of what we might call astate religion, along lines familiar in the Christian, Islamic, and Chinese orbits.Typical state support consisted of building monasteries and religious monu-180 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsHEIGHT OF MAURYA EMPIRE, 250 B.C.E.(From Davies, 1949, p. 13)External and Internal Politics: India • 181ments, donating property, such as the incomes of villages, for the support ofmonks, and protecting previous property donations by leaving them exemptfrom taxation. Religious donations were most often made by private persons,such as merchants or female relatives of the royal family; but this was especiallycommon in periods when the state also gave its protection and support. Somestates threw their material support heavily toward a particular religion, butmany rather evenhandedly patronized all the important sects. A big differencein the support of Buddhism and Hinduism is that the former was much moreinstitutionally organized, and hence patronage took the form of massive propertiedfoundations; whereas the Brahman priests were from landholding familiesand did not depend on donations for their survival.The scale of political support for a religion was largely a matter of the extentof material patronage. At the extreme there was exclusion and persecution:confiscating property, prohibiting ceremonies, or killing monks and priests. Butthese actions only tipped the balance when the material base was weak; andthat base depended not only on state patronage but also on the strength ofreligious carriers outside the state. By these criteria, let us consider how thevarious religions fared under different regimes.buddhist monasticismBuddhist patronage is easiest to document because it took the form of substantialmaterial edifices. Most of the surviving works of art and architecture forIndia until after the fall of the Maurya dynasty are from Buddhist sites, andwhen Hindu temples expanded in the Gupta period and thereafter, they followedBuddhist models (Craven, 1975: 117–121; Dutt, 1962: 142–143, 204–205). During the Maurya Empire, Buddhism began to spread outside itsMagadha homeland, encouraged in its missionary efforts by the wide reach ofthe Maurya regime. The emperor Ashoka became a lay Buddhist, and promulgatedBuddhist principles in public edicts while prohibiting the sacrificial cultsas contrary to Buddhist benevolence. This is the closest we get to all-outreligious conflict; the successor regime, the Shungas, not only reinstituted thesacrifices but also persecuted Buddhism, though apparently without muchsuccess (Dutt, 1962: 81). The proliferation of Buddhism south of the Vindhyarange, which cuts laterally across central India, dates from around 200 b.c.e.down to 100 c.e.; in the Andhra kingdom in the 200s c.e., magnificent monasterieswere built on donations from commercial wealth and aristocraticfamilies, while kings gave immunity from taxation (Dutt, 1962: 114–133, 158).The post-Maurya period also saw the beginning of state support in outlyingkingdoms of the northwest, including the kings of Kashmir, whose patronagecontinued a last outpost of Buddhism down to 900–1100 c.e.The Gupta Empire was a time of Hindu cultural efflorescence, but in the182 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsBALANCE OF POWER, 150 C.E.(From Davies, 1949, p. 15)External and Internal Politics: India • 183Ganges plain Buddhism was supported by half the population, and its preceptswere widely observed. Rulers and wealthy laity gave lavish materialsupport to the great Buddhist monasteries.3 The famous monastery-universityat Nalanda near the capital received the income from over 200 villages,donated by a succession of kings. When the Guptas disintegrated, the kingsof the trading corridor to the west (Gujarat), though they were themselvesShaivites, patronized Buddhist monasteries. Their great Buddhist center oflearning at Valabhi from about 490 to 780 was supported by royal land grantsand incomes from villages, designated for everything from buildings and victualsto incense and books; one senses a rivalry over the prestige of having agreat monastic center to compete with Nalanda in Magadha. At its height,victors in the public disputations at Valabhi’s “university” could expect governmentpreferment.Harsha’s brief empire in the 600s included Buddhism in its eclectic patronage;later we find the monks embroiled in disputes over possession of thesedonated villages (Dutt, 1962: 313). By now Buddhism had disappeared fromthe Deccan and the south and was largely confined to its lower Gangeshomeland. Chinese visitors describe deserted monasteries and neglected stupas(popular reliquaries of Buddhist saints) around the country, and even in Magadhamuch was in decline. Buddhism’s last great supporters were the Palakings of Bengal, who encroached on Magadha and founded several monasteryuniversitiesduring the 700s and 800s (most notably Vikramashila, with thelast foundation around 1100). These last Buddhist monasteries declined withthe power of the Pala state, and were finally pillaged by Muslim invaders inthe 1200s.Buddhism flourished in the strongest states, except of course in the Islamicones, where a state-religious alliance of an entirely different sort was imported.Buddhism was structurally more compatible than Hinduism with a centralizedofficialdom autonomously extracting economic resources and breaking downtraditional rights. At the earliest period of centralized state formation, we seethe kings competing for the prestige of having the new religious sages at theircourts, while the Vedic priest guilds represented the old family and clanstructure that was being displaced. In the same way, Buddhism later waswelcomed by centralizing rulers of previously clan-organized areas throughoutAsia; in Tibet, the struggle between court-sponsored Buddhism and Bon ritualistscoincided with the vicissitudes of the early monarchy in subjugating theclans (Stein, 1972: 47–71).Although Buddhist monasticism was deliberately remote from the state, itwas useful for rulers: it preached a moral pacification of the populace andprovided an institution for literate education. In Mongolia, China, and Japanwe see Buddhist ritualists at court, providing ceremonial impressiveness, some-184 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsGUPTA EMPIRE, 400 C.E.(From Davies, 1949, p. 19)External and Internal Politics: India • 185times under the guise of magic, a pattern that existed for Buddhist tantrismin Bengal and perhaps elsewhere in India as well. Buddhist leaders such as theTheravadin Moggaliputta-tissa at Ashoka’s court were sometimes friends ofrulers, and in some cases were relatives of upper-class families. For kings offrontier areas or conquest regions, founding monasteries was a means of settlementor of removing property from rival lords (a pattern particularly noticeablein the Buddhist-supporting conquest states in northern China, andparalleled by royal support of Christian monasteries in early medieval Germanyand eastern Europe). Monasteries, too, as the only forms of collectiveorganization transcending the family, were preeminent at accumulating property;as early as the Kushan Empire (in the northwest around 100 c.e.), therewere indications that laypersons were transferring property to monasteries andcircumventing family inheritance, provoking legal counterattack by Brahmanlegists (Dutt, 1962: 201, 313). Donations to monasteries might come from faraway, including incomes from grants of land and villages by distant kings ormerchants, as well as expenditures of students and pilgrims; thus a greatmonastery or shrine in one’s kingdom would be a center for trade and foramassing wealth.In all these respects Buddhism contrasts with the Brahmanism which grewout of the old Vedic priest guilds. Brahmanism expanded the importance ofkinship structures throughout society, through marital and ritual regulationswhich made up a greatly elaborated caste system. Learned pandits becameformulators and custodians of legal codes which restricted the autonomy ofthe state while bolstering the economic and social powers of local elites.Brahmans not only tended to make themselves tax-exempt, but also limitedthe abilities of rulers to mobilize resources to expand the state. Hinduismflourished where rulers were weak; conversely, the social penetration of Hinduismperpetuated a pattern of weakly centralized, ephemeral states.Indian Buddhism and Hinduism are two points along a continuum; neitheris a state religion, although Buddhism has a closer symbiosis with strong states,Hinduism with weak ones. Buddhism, carried by monks as missionaries orrefugees, was much more transportable across lines of civilizations than Hinduism.Buddhist monasticism could be incorporated into strong states withwell-established literate civilizations, and could introduce state administrationinto preliterate tribal regions. Brahmanism was much less transportable. Itcould not take root merely by the migration of a few Brahman priests to aforeign court, such as took place at times in China, the Archipelago, and evenSri Lanka. Its successes came by permeating tribal areas, as it did duringits spread from the Ganges to southern India, as well as into Nepal; fromaround 100 to 600 c.e., it spread into Burma and southeast Asia, but waslargely displaced when Buddhism received patronage from consolidating states186 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Paths(Davies, 1949: 30; OHI, 1981: 186). Hinduism was a full-scale social complex,in which Brahmans functioned not only as ritualists but also as upholders ofa system of kinship and material stratification organized around caste.The extent of state interference within Buddhism had important consequencesfor intellectual creativity. The state rarely became involved in disputesbetween sects within Indian Buddhism. In contrast is the pattern in states whereBuddhism was especially closely connected with the royal house, notably SriLanka and Southeast Asia (Gombrich, 1988: 138–145, 158–166; Zürcher,1962; Kalupahana, 1992: 206–208). The closer the identification of Buddhismwith the state, the more closely sectarian fortunes within Buddhism were tiedto politics; this in turn restricted the playing field on which intellectual activitytook place. Although there were flourishing centers of studies in Malaya andgreat temple complexes at the Burmese capital, state enforcement of orthodoxykept philosophy in these countries largely traditionalist and uncreative. We seethe same pattern at the very end of Buddhist patronage in India. The Pala kingsof Bengal not only founded a new set of monastic universities but also keptthem under close royal control; all posts in an elaborate hierarchy of teachersand administrators were held on commission, and all degrees were awardedby the king (Dutt, 1962: 360–361). Intellectual creativity did not flourish underthis tight control. This situation is comparable to the stagnation in Confucianphilosophy after it became adopted by the Han bureaucracy, and again duringthe enforcement of state orthodoxy during the Ming; by contrast, the creativeperiod of Confucianism during the Sung occurred when both religious orthodoxyand the state ideological apparatus were in flux. In India the greatestintellectual creativity in Buddhism took place when states eclectically patronizednot just Buddhism but non-Buddhist religions as well, leaving a breathingspace in which Buddhist factions could take maximal advantage of theirorganizational base for intellectual life.jaina asceticismThe early spread of the Jainas is parallel to that of the Buddhists. Beginningin Magadha, their shrines reached Andhra in the southeast and Mathura inthe upper Ganges in the post-Maurya period, and continued under the Guptas(Craven, 1975; Coomaraswamy, [1927] 1965; Dutt, 1962; Zimmer, 1951:181–279; OHI, 1981: 98–102, 137–138). The Jainas had close royal tiesduring the early buildup of imperial power. Thereafter Jaina patronage waslargely confined to the regional kings and coastal merchants of the west andsouth, leaving Buddhism in exclusive possession as the ascetic-monastic religionin the Ganges heartland and the north.Jainism’s strict practices confined its lay followers to urban pursuits; overtime, it found a distinctive niche by shaping its doctrines so that urban mer-External and Internal Politics: India • 187chants were attracted while agricultural pursuits were excluded. Its base wasnarrower than that of the popular Hindu cults or the Buddhists in their prime.In periods when coastal trade flourished, Jainas were capable of accumulatingwealth on a scale unmatched by the Brahman-centered rural economy. Sincethis was the same resource base which made possible most of the strongerstates in the south and on the western coast, Jainism became embroiled inviolent state conflicts with overtones of religious war. Jainism was displacedfrom the south after 1130 as new Shaivite and Vaishnavite movements modifiedthe caste system to allow Hindus access to commercial enterprise, in whichthey became predominant by Mogul times (Braudel, [1979] 1984: 484–520).Never as large a religion as Buddhism, Jainism survived longer. From itsrelatively weak base, it played a rather cautious role as a bystander in theunfolding of intellectual space.hinduismThe ascendancy of Hinduism was not simply a result of the caste system. Castewas compatible with Buddhism, too, as far as the activities of the lay worldwere concerned; throughout its history in India, Buddhism often recruited fromamong the Brahmans, and transcendence of caste took place only amongmonks. We find kings using Brahmanical rituals even while they were givingBuddhism some of its richest patronage: Horse sacrifices were performed, oneby the Andhran king to inaugurate his capital, at the very site where the greatmonastery complex at Nagarjunakonda was built a few years later, another bythe Gupta emperor who founded the great monastery-university at Nalanda;even the extremely pro-Buddhist Sri Lankan and Southeast Asian kings usedBrahmans for royal rituals for lack of a Buddhist form of coronation (Dutt,1962: 126–128, 330; Gombrich, 1988: 145). Yet Hindu cults themselvessometimes transcended caste. This was true of the antinomian Shaiva ascetics,and of the popular bhakti cults (such as the followers of Krishna), whichpromised salvation to worshippers from any caste (Pandey, 1986; Eliot, 1988:2:248–256). Caste became most explicitly an issue between Hindus and Buddhistsrelatively late—in the 600s and 700s c.e., when Mimamsakas andNaiyayikas defended the philosophical basis of caste, and Buddhists such asKamalashila attacked it. But this was at the turning point of Hindu ascendancyover Buddhism, when militancy peaked on both sides.Hinduism was not a primordial religious identity but a self-conscious unitedfront that gradually built up in opposition to Buddhists and Jainas. At firstthere was only a series of separate strands coming down from the ancienttheistic cults and the Sanskrit literature that accumulated upon the Vedas. Suchmovements did not necessarily have much unity; the Shaivas were at firstscorned by the Brahmans as phallic worshippers, and most of their Vedic188 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsconnection came from the Atharvaveda, the magic spells incorporated only lateinto the Vedas. The Vaishnavas, worshippers of Vishnu, formed their owncollection of sacred texts around 100 b.c.e.–100 c.e. (alternatively, ca. 300–800 c.e.) as rival to the Brahmanical samhita (Pandey, 1986; Eliot, 1988:2:136–205; Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 3:12–93; Raju, 1985: 439). Virtually allthe most prominent Hindu religions in the Common Era were unorthodoxfrom the point of view of traditionalist Brahmans.The Hinduism which we can speak of as acquiring political power wasrather a mixed bag. The old Vedic alliance between Brahman priests and thekings for whom they performed court rituals was gone. Replacing it wereseveral divergent forms of religious organization. New theistic cults werecelebrated at court. Many kings identified with Shiva in their official propaganda,perhaps because of his ferocious aspect as destroyer and creator of theuniverse; there was also much royal identification with deities who were notcentral to the Hindu literary pantheon, especially Surya the sun god (Craven,1975: 55, 104, 177, 181; Eliot, 1988: 2:206). Such court ceremonial sometimeswent along with performance of the great Vedic sacrifices under Brahmanauspices, but could also replace them. Another variant consisted of the populardevotional cults of the late medieval period. Unlike the Vedic ceremonies,which had no temples and were carried out either in the house or at outdoorturf altars, these bhakti cults had a new material base—the permanent templewith its autonomous staff (Smith, 1989: 151; OHI, 1981:32–33). Here asecond form of state-religious patronage was possible; some kings built templesto Hindu deities and endowed their priests with incomes from land. Suchtemple building generally came later and followed earlier patterns of Buddhistendowments, which had pioneered collective religious property in India. Fromthe 800s onward, the ascendancy of the bhakti devotional cults displaced theVedic gods and shifted the center of popular attention to the temples. Boththese forms of Hinduism had a rather conventional alliance with the state.They posed some rivalry to patronage of the monastic religions but were notnecessarily incompatible with it. There was nothing organizationally incongruousabout a ruler’s spreading largess simultaneously to several religions; ideologicallythe adjustment was made by each cult’s recognizing some of theother’s spiritual symbols while assigning it a lower place in one’s own religiouscosmology: the Buddha was eventually regarded as an incarnation of Vishnu,and Jainas in their late syncretizing period incorporated lay worship of Hindugods as junior spirits subordinate to their own enlightened Tirthankaras.The more radical challenge came from the version of Hinduism thatemerged as the Brahmans reorganized their power position vis-à-vis the state.Indian states, following a tradition dating back to the entrepreneurial kingswho cleared the forest frontiers, always claimed absolute ownership of theExternal and Internal Politics: India • 189land, the produce of which constituted the main basis of state revenues. Afterthe disintegration of the Maurya Empire, this capacity to control land revenuesbegan to dissipate into a form of religious feudalism. Buddhism was theopening wedge, already receiving land grants to support its monasteries byMaurya times. Brahmans also began to receive land grants, especially as theycarried agricultural development into virgin territories in the south. By 100c.e., the kings were giving away cultivated lands and the rights to administerthem without interference from royal officials. By the late Gupta period, rulerswere dispensing grants including all revenues, labor dues, and powers ofcriminal justice. In the political chaos of the 500s following the Gupta collapse,the Brahman-centered localistic social structure seems to have become dominant.When Harsha reestablished an empire in the early 600s, it was administeredthrough a lavish distribution of land grants. As in most subsequentstates, the state apparatus consisted of little more than the military officials,and the ruler kept control only by incessant travel or campaign. After 1000,centralized powers collapsed virtually everywhere. Land grants fell into thehands of a flux of military lords, while the temples became major centers ofaccumulated wealth.4During this development, Brahmans completed the transition from priestsallied to the royal courts to arbiters of local social relations independent of thecentral state. Caste law, administered by the Brahmans, was built up to controlall local economic production and much of its distribution. Buddhism, livingin symbiosis with the centralized agrarian state, was threatened by the newBrahmanism capable of cutting off its flow of material resources. The displacementof Buddhism from India and the victory of Hinduism followed whenthese several lines of movement converged: on the one hand the creation ofthe Brahman-centered legal system and the institutionalization of the weakstate; on the other the undercutting of Buddhist patronage and popular supportby the emergence of rival Hindu temples and eventually Hindu monks. Whenthe sociopolitical foundations shifted, the Hindu side mounted an ideologicalattack which delegitimated Buddhism.Conflict between Hinduism and Buddhism took place over a long periodand in both intense and diffuse forms. There were times of explicit battles atthe royal courts, when court ceremonial was at issue, or when laws werepromulgated enforcing Buddhist precepts among the population. Beneath thiswas a larger drift, first the spread of Buddhist monasteries and stupa cults,then their decline. Some points stand out: the advent of the Shunga kings, whotook over the disintegrating Maurya Empire and reversed its ban on sacrifices(here we have the most extreme pro-Buddhist state followed by one of the mostmilitantly anti-Buddhist); the widespread adherence to Buddhist rules in northernIndia during the early Guptas, followed by a growth of Hindu patronage190 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsin the Ganges valley to match Buddhism; the destruction by the Shaiva kingof the Hunas of Buddhist stupas and monasteries in the northwest in the early500s; the weak penetration of Buddhism in south India, and its disappearancearound 500 or 600 amidst militantly Hinduizing states; the spread of Hinduisminto Kashmir, balancing Buddhism and then displacing it in the 900s;and the battle of Buddhist and Hindu kings in the lower Ganges—a deliberatelyHinduizing king in the late 700s, followed by the militantly pro-BuddhistPala kings, then a reverse swing with the Hindu destruction of Buddhisttemples in Bengal ca. 1050. By 1200 Buddhism had expired entirely, the coupde grâce administered by Muslim raiders (OHI, 1981: 171, 201; Dutt, 1962:206–207, 376).After Buddhism was gone, internecine political conflict within Hinduismescalated to take its place. During the time when Buddhism was fading out,Jaina-Hindu conflict was at its height, and the most violent persecutionscentered in those places, especially in the south, where the Jainas were mostclosely identified with the rulers. Here too, in the centuries following Hinduvictory over court Jainism (roughly 1100–1400), were kings who supportedeither Shaiva or Vaishnava cults and persecuted the other. Creativity peakedamong the religious intellectuals located at the key transition points—both onthe way up and on the way down.The Long-Term Politics of Intellectual Splits and AlliancesStrong schools subdivide; weak schools ally. This is the general principlegoverning the long-term dynamics of intellectual factions. Hence the two-stepcausality whereby external sociopolitical changes strengthen or weaken thebase for an intellectual-supporting organization, and motivate its members tofractionate or unify their philosophical positions.Intellectual politics is further governed by a second principle. The intellectuallaw of small numbers holds that the attention space allows three to sixdistinctive positions; this constitutes the limit within which a politically dominantschool can split. The law of small numbers can be violated, but with apenalty: beyond the upper limit of about a half-dozen positions, additionalintellectual factions fail to propagate themselves across the generations. Theyfail to recruit successors, and their memory fades out, either because they areneglected or because they are lumped in with some more prominent position.The long-term intellectual history of India nicely illustrates these principles.(1) When the sacrificial cult is dominant, the Vedic priests split into fivefactions; later they unite in opposition to the Buddhist ascendancy. (2) TheUpanishadic pre-Buddhist period spawns a large number of individual philosophies,most of which are squeezed out by the law of small numbers. (3) Bud-External and Internal Politics: India • 191EVE OF MOGUL INVASION, 1525(From Davies, 1949, p. 39)192 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsdhism during its period of strong political patronage splits into numerousfactions, from which are winnowed a moderate number of long-standingpositions; when its bases in India shrink, Buddhist philosophies amalgamate.(4) Jainism keeps a modest, steady basis of support and a unitary philosophicalposition, aimed at mediating within the larger intellectual field. (5) WhenHindu intellectuals take over the Buddhist organizational resources and displacethem from the center of intellectual networks, Hindu philosophies crystallizeinto about a half-dozen well-defined positions.5 (6) Advaita Vedanta isespecially successful, building a new material foundation by organizing ordersof Hindu monks; as Vedanta grows, it splits into subfactions which dominatethe intellectual debate, while non-Vedantic schools tend to syncretize and areeventually absorbed into theistic Vedanta. (7) The Vaishnava theists, worshippersof Vishnu and his avatar Krishna, are the most successful movement,splitting into branches with their own technical philosophies. (8) Still later,under the pressure of Muslim and then European conquest, the Vedanticfactions downplay their philosophical differences and amalgamate into a syncreticpan-Hindu front. The politics of intellectual subdivision and alliancemakingruns through five broad repetitions: Vedic, Buddhist, Hindu, Vedantic,and Vaishnavite.6Religious Bases of Philosophical Factions: Divisions andRecombination of Vedic RitualistsThe Vedas, a word which originally meant simply “knowledge,” are notabstract philosophy but the earliest transmission of specialized intellectualproductions. Let us see what they reveal about the organization of priestlypolitics.The orthodox Hinduism of medieval India adulated “the four Vedas.” Onecan discern a long-term pattern of splits and recombinations among organizedintellectual groups before this end point was reached.7 Sometime before1000 b.c.e., a collection was formed out of liturgical materials, includinghymns, prayers, incantations, and sacrificial formulas. This collection, knownas the Rigveda (“knowledge of verses”), must have coincided with formationof a unified guild of priests. Subsequently two more Vedas were formed,both consisting of different arrangements of much the same materials as theRigveda. The Samaveda is the knowledge of samans, sacred songs. The Yagurvedacontained spells and formulas used in the rituals, plus meaningless-soundingwords chanted as mantras (yagus).The orthodox interpretation is that separate Vedas come from a divisionof labor in the ceremonies, each Veda constituting the liturgy of one of theExternal and Internal Politics: India • 193priests. The original single priest was increased to 3 and then more; the numberof priests required for sacrifice increased over time from 4 to 16 (Stutley, 1980:80). But the distinct Veda texts did not simply correspond to the number ofroles; more likely the divisions emerged as rival lineages spun off, concernedmore with the proto-intellectual activities of memorizing and teaching a particulartext than with the ritual itself. The old Rigvedic guild had split, andeach sect propagandized for its own primacy (Krishna, 1991: 73, 93).Further splits occurred. The Yagurveda had at least two versions, Whiteand Black; the latter included prose discussions of the rituals, indicating thatit belonged to the group which pioneered in creating the Brahmanas, shiftingfrom a liturgical to a more intellectual orientation.8 Yet another group becameorganized as proprietors of the Atharvaveda, a collection of magical rites andcharms originating outside the Rigvedic camp. They seem to have been acoalition of magicians from the indigenous non-Aryan population, first coalescinginto a rival guild; then they adopted Aryan gods and ritual forms andbecame players in the ritual politics and ideological fractionation of the mainstream.Orthodox Vedists looked askance at the Atharvaveda and did notaccept it among the “four Vedas” until late, when the whole enterprise was inthe syncretism of a weakening base.The competing sects emulated one another over the generations. All of themadded the same kinds of texts to their original samhitas (canonical collections):prose Brahmanas, discussing the practical and theological significance of therites (before 800 b.c.e., perhaps continuing later); Aranyakas, comprisingliturgies for individual Brahmans to carry out in retirement; and finally Upanishads,recording the discussions of reforming sages who emerged after about700.9 It is apparent that the priest guilds were no longer engaged mainly, oreven primarily, in carrying out public rituals. The addition of lengthy texts tothe samhitas implies that a great deal of time was now being spent in discussionand education. Something like an intellectual community was becoming a focusof attention in its own right. Socially, the Brahmans were becoming a landowningclass, engaged in other occupations besides priestcraft. What they retainedin common was the mark of having studied the Vedas, and the right to teachthem. The Brahmans shifted from a priest class to an educational status group.The very nature of ritual activity shifted. The Vedas were no longer so muchliturgies which priests used in great public ceremonies as texts which piousBrahmans recited daily in private.After about 500 b.c.e.—the time when the old tribal kingdoms were rapidlyconsolidating under the geopolitical dominance of the Ganges states—theperiod of splits and rivalries among the Vedic schools ends. A reversal sets in,with all the sects eventually merging into a common front of Vedic education.In the Upanishads, students typically mention that they have learned all of the194 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsVedas. One is no longer learning a particular priest role in the ceremonies; allthe Vedas are now regarded as essentially one body of knowledge, to be learnedby everyone in the educated class. For a long time there is indecisiveness aboutwhether the Atharvas belong in this sacred alliance. Many Upanishads referto the “three Vedas”; sometimes they add “with the Atharvana as the fourth.”10The term “four Vedas” becomes firmly established only with the formulationof a Hindu culture in opposition to the Buddhists’.The long-term process conforms to the law of small numbers. In the earlyperiod, the Vedic priests have the entire attention space to themselves; theysplit into four factions (counting both Black and White Yagurvedas), while theoppositional faction, the Atharva magicians, pulls together as a single collection.Then comes the attack on the Brahmanical guilds by a proliferation ofdissident sages, leading to the ascendancy of the Buddhists. Now the Brahmans,on the defensive, overcome their differences and syncretize into a united front.Strong positions divide, weak positions unite.The Crowded Competition of the SagesThe breakdown of the Vedic cults is more obscured by retrospective ideologythan any other period in Indian history. It is commonly assumed that thedominant philosophy now became an idealist monism, the identification ofatman (self) and Brahman (Spirit), and that this mysticism was believed toprovide a way to transcend rebirths on the wheel of karma. This is far froman accurate picture of what we read in the Upanishads. It has become traditionalto view the Upanishads through the lens of Shankara’s Advaita interpretation.This imposes the philosophical revolution of about 700 c.e. upon avery different situation 1,000 to 1,500 years earlier. Shankara picked outmonist and idealist themes from a much wider philosophical lineup.11 Thedoctrines of karma and escape from rebirth, too, are by no means dominantamong the Upanishadic sages, but come to the forefront in the networksaround the Buddha. It was the formation of Buddhism and Jainism whichfocused the basic themes of the religious-philosophical attention space; whatwe call Hinduism emerged as a reaction to these monastic movements.The social characteristics of the intellectual community depicted in theUpanishads are much the same as we find in the early Buddhist and Jaina texts.There is a multitude of sages, teachers with competing doctrines, engaging inpublic debates. In the Upanishads these debates most often take place underthe auspices of kings; in the monastic recollections they also occur in sheltersand rainy season retreats for the wandering ascetics.12 In both sources theBrahmans are under attack.The Brahmans by now are no longer merely professional priests; they haveExternal and Internal Politics: India • 195become teachers and caretakers of traditional knowledge, like the Confucianju, although much less political. According to the ideal, the student goes tolive at the house of his teacher, acting as his servant (alternatively a studentcan be taught by his own father). Learning consists in memorizing and recitinga text; allegedly it takes 12 years to learn one Veda, although this can hardlybe accurate, given that students were now learning three or four Vedas, plusa good deal of other knowledge such as grammar, etymology, numbers, astronomy,portents, demonology, and so on (e.g., Chandogya Upanishad 7.1.2). TheBrahmans are now not so much performing religious rituals as engaging in alengthy scholastic routine.It is apparent that the educational business is booming. There is also a gooddeal of questioning traditional teaching methods and contents. The Upanishadstake for granted that students attend various schools and learn many religiousand non-religious specialties. Some stories tells of students who learn fromcattle, or from gods who appear to them; the idiom expresses the fact thatstudents are producing ideas from their own inspiration. Such individualistswould likely include the ascetic sages depicted in the Buddhist and Jaina texts,a rival type of intellectual who makes a point of his independence fromtraditional teaching and its methods. These sages known as shramanas, makea sharp break with the economic and social base of the Brahmans, who arenow wealthy householders and landowners; the dissidents are alms men, holybeggars who have given up householding to become lifelong ascetic recluses.Nevertheless, one gets a sense that the shramanas too are competing for studentfollowers. The common greeting among wanderers was to ask one anotherabout their teacher and doctrine; the lives of the Buddha and Mahavira describeconversions of followers from one teacher to another.There is an upsurge now of cultural production and dissemination. In partthis comes from the breakdown of the Vedic cults and the spread of educationto a much wider group than the priests. It is also during this period (by the500s b.c.e.; Thapar, 1966: 63) that writing appears. It does not have a verydirect effect on the educational world, since most of what we see is oralrecitation and debate. The use of writing most likely began with record keepingin the expanding governments of the time, and with merchant accounts; thereligious intellectuals were the most conservative, centered as they were on theritualized transmission of their knowledge. This is a pattern we find elsewhere,such as in the exclusively oral traditions of the Celtic Druid priests long afterwriting was available in the secular world. The availability of an alternativeform of knowledge outside of priestly circles, however, must have contributedto the delegitimation of Brahmanical claims for cultural dominance.The Upanishads contain many stories of students whose teachers do notknow the new doctrines, of old-style priests who are embarrassed by ceremo-196 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsnies put on by others who know their secret meanings. There are kings whocan pose questions that the Brahmans cannot answer, and kings who areteachers. None of this is surprising in view of the political realities of theexpanding states. Many Upanishads have the theme that Brahmans should notbe too proud to learn new doctrines, even in their old age, or from outsiders.Many sages are named in the Upanishads, but none who is uniformly depictedas dominant. Uddalaka Aruni is described several times, sometimes as ignorant,sometimes as wise.13 Yajñavalkya wins debates in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad,but so does the king of Banaras. No one founds a notable intergenerationalschool of followers.The main questions discussed within Brahmanical circles are to explain themeaning of ceremonies and to name the gods who are behind them. Thiscontinues the main theme of the Brahmanas and Aranyakas, the explicationof liturgies. But in the Upanishadic circles and among the shramanas, the godsbegin to be downgraded or interpreted in an etymological sense, and thefavorite question now shifts to a more abstract level: to list the elements outof which the world is composed or created. There are many different lists. Inthe Upanishads, the elements include sun or fire; the person in the right or theleft eye; sight, smell, and other senses; earth; water; air/breath (treated eitheras one element or as two); ether/space; food; power; force; name or form; andso on. Such lists typically mix physical and psychological categories. Often,long lists of elements are all accepted; in other accounts there are creationstories which begin with one of these elements, or sometimes with “nothing”taken as an element, then going on to generate the rest of the list. Sometimesthe cosmology is dualistic, sometimes extremely pluralistic.Many Upanishadic texts compile contradictory positions. When specificdebates are described, argument does not usually involve finding logical contradictionsin opposing doctrines. The favorite style of debate is to pose a seriesof questions until the other cannot answer. “What is the origin of that?” “X.”“What is the origin of X?” “Y.” And so on. No one in the Upanishads seesthis as an infinite regress. Generally the account ends with the interlocutorceasing to question. Sometimes the questioner is told to stop “lest your headshould fall off.”14 The argument that the ultimate is inexpressible is made onlyoccasionally (primarily in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, e.g., 4.2.4; 6.1); theAdvaita-style distinction-transcending mysticism later attributed to the Upanishadsis far from dominant. Instead what we find are contests of rhetoricalimpressiveness, in which a debate is won by asserting one’s primal elementwith the highest degree of confidence. Given the extreme variety of elementsmentioned, it is apparent that the rhetoric triumphant on one occasion doesnot deter rivals elsewhere.Some elements are named repeatedly. One complex is fire, sun, or light. AExternal and Internal Politics: India • 197second is ether, space, or the void.15 A third kind of favorite element is prana,or breath, which frequently figures in creation tales and in anecdotes about thefive senses leaving the body. Prana is a favorite also because it is the key tospeech, which in turn ties in with the line of argument that the names of thingsconstitute their forms. Here we have something like a Platonist pluralism. Yetthere are also primitive shamanistic themes, such as those expressed by thebreath/wind magicians in the Brihadaranyaka (Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 149–154). A fourth theme is that there is a self within the body, or within the heartor the eye; some texts assert that this self is also in the sun or moon. A commonargument is that the self is conscious even when asleep, as in dreaming; andsometimes it is argued that dreamlessness too is a self. Occasionally the secretdoctrine mentions where the self goes at death, or in deep sleep. Some textsassert that the self is behind everything. Such passages in the Chandogya andBrihadaranyaka became retrospectively famous, but even in these Upanishadsthey are by no means the only cosmological doctrine.The purposes of this new knowledge are several. (1) To upstage other priestswith one’s superior wisdom. Here emerges a genuine intellectual competition,which hits on a topic opening the disinterested search for knowledge, askingafter the elements of which the world is composed. (2) New knowledge is alsotouted as a superior magic for worldly ends. Often this is tied to passages onrituals “that will grow leaves on a dead stick,” or for ends such as acquiringcattle or achieving sexual pleasure or even revenge.16 (3) Frequently the newknowledge is said to bring immortality in heaven. Knowledge is often claimedto be for the time of one’s death, incorporated into death chants and rituals,or into the lore of the “forest-dwelling” stage of a Brahman’s old age. Hereemerges a genuinely new religious theme, since life after death is not importantin the Vedas. Various heavens or after-death states are now posited: the realmof the Fathers, the realm of the gods and pleasures, with a few sparse referenceto possible hells.This religious doctrine is not what would later become the classic Hinducomplex of karma, reincarnation, and liberation through insight or yoga. Itoften exalts material life prolonged into a rather worldly afterlife. ManyUpanishads regard a long life as good.17 Among earlier Upanishads, reincarnationis only sporadically mentioned; the doctrines are unsettled and distinctlynon–classic “Hindu.” Some assert that one’s thought at the moment of deathdetermines one’s next life, which might be in heaven (Prashna Upanishad 3.10).Some assert that one has a choice between reincarnation and immortality; ifthe latter, one’s good acts go to one’s favorite kinsmen, while bad acts go todisliked ones (Kaushitaki Upanishad 1.2–4). Another account is that the soulafter death goes to the moon and falls back to the earth as rain. There is nogenerally accepted sequence.198 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThrough the main period of the Upanishadic sages, there is little or nothingon the karmic consequences of one’s actions chaining one to a cycle of rebirths.18 Nor do most Upanishadic sages seem to practice yoga or one-pointedconcentration (samadhi). The early sages, Uddalaka, Yajñavalkya, and theirdebating partners, are concerned with scoring philosophical points. SomeUpanishads enjoin thoughtful contemplation during hymns and rituals (AitareyaUpanishad 2.1–3). A full-fledged description of Yoga method as a routeto liberation does not come until the middle-period Shvetashvatara Upanishad(1–2), ca. 300–200 b.c.e., and again in the late Maitrayani Upanishad (6.18–29). It appears that most Brahmans spent their time either in rituals, in recitingtheir ever-lengthening texts, or sometimes in debates.The Upanishads describe the period of debating sages from the point ofview of the Brahmans. In heterodox descriptions we also find the shramanasformulating rival element cosmologies. The Buddha converts three brothers ofa Brahman family and their followers, ascetics who carry out ceremonies neara volcano and apparently regard fire as the primary element (Mizuno, 1980:61). Other famous contemporaries of the Buddha (25 and 26 in Figure 5.1)proposed that the world is made out of seven elements, or four. Some of theshramanas carry denunciation of Brahmanical orthodoxy to an extreme, assertinga purely naturalist position that the world consists of nothing but theworking out of the elements. These are the Lokayata, or “materialists.” Whatdistinguishes the shramanas as a whole from the Brahmans is that the formerhave organized a new lifestyle, cut loose from householding and centered onthe practice of austerities. It might seem peculiar that the Lokayata, preachingpurely worldly existence, should also be ascetics. But this is the social milieuof the charismatic teachers; the Lokayata are a faction which emerges fromthe debates among the element philosophers in the sector competing over whohas gone furthest in overturning the Brahmanical lifestyle.It is in the shramana circles that the doctrines of karma and samsara(rebirth) become central topics of debate, and the issues on which top intellectualreputations are made. Both the Buddha and Mahavira founded movementsclaiming the overcoming of karma. For the Jainas, the karma doctrine was castin the concepts of a materialist element philosophy; karma is the fruit of action,conceived as material particles which stick to the soul and keep it from itsnatural omniscience. The Buddha conceived karma in a more abstract fashion,as a chain of causality which leads to attachment to the forms of the materialworld and hence to rebirth. The third successful movement organized at thistime, the Ajivikas of Makkhali Gosala, exalted the idea of karma into aninescapable fate; each person’s life inevitably goes through its chain of consequencesand rebirths until it reaches the end, like a ball of thread beingunwound.External and Internal Politics: India • 199Other famous contemporary philosophers made their reputations by denyingkarma. Pakudha Kaccayana, who espoused a cosmology of seven elements,was disputed by the Buddha over the denial of karma, which the Buddhaexcoriated as the denial of morality. Purana Kashyapa was famous for denyingkarma and morality; he associated personally with both Mahavira andMakkhali Gosala (Basham, 1951: 138, 278; Hirakawa, 1990: 16–19).The great creative generations (ca. 500 or 400 b.c.e.)19 in which philosophiesand religious movements crystallized is also the time in which the karmadoctrine seems to have become the center of attention. What is crucial is thatthe intellectual community hit upon a problem in terms of which far-reachingconsequences for lifestyle and for thought could be formulated. It would befalse to assume that karma was a long-standing issue, that Indians suffered forcenturies under a pessimistic belief that they were bound to a wheel of rebirths,in a suffering world and an oppressive caste system, until the Buddhists andJainas seemed to show the way to liberation. The problem and its solutionappeared more or less simultaneously. Karma is a vague concept in the Upanishads,where emerging beliefs about immortality were more likely to befocused on the afterlife in heaven than on return to the world. No doubt therewere primitive tribal beliefs about reincarnation; but these differ from theBuddhist-Jaina problem insofar as nothing was assumed to be negative aboutlife and hence about living again. In addition, the moral dynamics of reincarnation,lacking in tribal beliefs, were made the center of causation, especiallyin the Buddhist view (Halbfass, 1991: 292–294, 321–325; Obeyesekere, 1980).It was the Buddhists who formulated the pessimistic idea that life is fundamentallysuffering; at the same time, they expounded their solution, the pathto overcome karma. The problem and its solution go together; it is their jointformulation that constitutes one of those long-standing successful moves inintellectual space—the discovery of what we may call a “deep trouble.” Avariant of this move is found in most great religious doctrines. In moralisticsalvation religions, the concept of hell as a place of punishment is formulated(sometimes building on previous conceptions of the afterlife as a shadowy landof death) at the same time that the religion shows the path toward avoidingpunishment; the one is an incentive for the other. The Buddha is the first greatfigure in Indian philosophy because he took the concepts emerging in thenetworks of his time and created a unifying complex of the key problemtogether with its solution.Monastic Movements and the Ideal of Meditative MysticismThat there is a crystallization point is apparent from the fact that Buddhism,Jainism, and the Ajivikas all emerged at the same time and from the samenetwork (see Figure 5.1). Several factors were involved.200 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Paths1. Inside the attention space of the competing sages, a high degree ofovercrowding had been reached. The law of small numbers holds that beyondthree to six distinctive positions, most intellectuals will be unable toacquire followers and keep their position going in the reputational space acrossthe generations. This is what we see in the Upanishads: a very large numberof positions, none shaped into a well-recognized doctrine, and a multitudeof sages, virtually none of them receiving widespread reputation. Atthe time of the Buddha there were the famous “six non-conformist teachers,”plus many other positions; one Buddhist sutra mentions 62 sects, while theJaina canons refer to as many as 363 schools (Chakravarti, 1987: 35; Isayeva,1993: 23). The focus of attention created by Buddhists and Jainas drasti-FIGURE 5.1. INDIAN NETWORK, 800–400 B.C.E.:THE FOUNDING RIVALRIESExternal and Internal Politics: India • 201cally simplifies intellectual space to well within the bounds of the law of smallnumbers.Buddhism’s content was shaped by the overcrowding of intellectual factionsat its time of foundation. Across world history, periods in which the law ofsmall numbers is violated tend to give rise, somewhere among the factions, toa position which declares that truth is impossible. Citing the plethora ofopposing positions and the endless debates, one gains a certain meta-prominencein the field by espousing a philosophy of skepticism. In India the personwho created such a position explicitly was Sañjaya (18 in Figure 5.1). He wasclose to the Buddha in the network, and some of his most prominent followersconverted and became leading Buddhists. Early Buddhism appropriated astrong streak of skepticism. The Buddha cautions his followers to stay alooffrom intellectual disputes, since they are fruitless and distract from the practicesleading to enlightenment.Yet it is impossible to avoid all intellectual activity once one enters the field.Gautama Shakyamuni became elevated as the Buddha by formulating a doctrinewhich negated the major claims of the rival positions while building uponthem at a new philosophical and religious level. Using the skeptics, he assertedthe non-existence of the ego, thereby combatting those Upanishadic sages whosought the ultimate self. Creating a new position by opposition, Shakyamuniheld that attachment to a permanent self in this world of change is the causeof suffering and the main obstacle to liberation. The same skeptical weaponsnegate the existence of Brahma or any high god or spiritual reality, delegitimatingboth traditional and iconoclastic religious methods for reaching atranscendent reality.20 Shakyamuni broke new ground by going on to explainthe source of the apparent ego: it is merely the result of the aggregates (skandas)which make up experience. Here the Buddha was heir to the element philosophies,while eliminating mythological rhetoric and systematizing world componentsinto five groups (corporeality, feeling, perception, mental dispositions,and consciousness).21 By coordinating material components with psychologicalones, it became possible to formulate (perhaps not by Shakyamuni himself butsoon after) a model of how the entire world of experience is built up, atwelve-fold chain of causality beginning with ignorance and leading throughvolition, consciousness, material form, the senses, impressions, feeling, craving,attachment, and becoming, to birth, old age, and death. By understanding andreversing this chain in meditation, one is able to return to the origin and achieveliberation. Although the Buddha denies the transcendent world of the religioussages as yet another reification, he is able to incorporate a more subtle senseof transcending the world of name and form.The conception that the world is governed by a chain of causation aroseamong Shakyamuni’s immediate predecessors and rivals in the concepts of202 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathskarma and fate. The Buddha developed this conception into a system-groundingcategory of dependent origination, drawing out the connection betweenuniversal causality and the transitoriness and ultimate unreality of a worldcomposed of aggregations. The philosophical creativity of the Buddha is inraising these ingredients from his surrounding network into a rationalizedposition on a higher level of abstraction and coherence.2. Organizationally, the new monastic movements were a sharp departurefrom the usual life of the shramanas. The Buddhists were the first organizationwith formal rules and a collective identity. They met in local communities andsometimes in pan-community councils, and subordinated individual membersto the sangha, the body as a whole. (Chakravarti, 1987: 46–64; Hirakawa,1990). Although the Buddha is a charismatic leader, he pushes his organizationaway from personal followership. Instead of naming a successor, he admonishesthe monks to be “lamps unto themselves,” focused on the teachings andcollective practices. It is indicative that the first teachings which his followerscollected were not the philosophical doctrines but the Vinaya, the disciplinaryrules of the monks. The Jainas (and apparently the Ajivikas; see Basham, 1951)also formulated similar rules centered on monastic community government. Incontrast, the other shramanas had consisted of personal followings of particularteachers; they were purely charismatic movements, unable to outlive theirleaders.This tendency toward an autonomous collective identity was reinforced asthe Buddhists and Jainas acquired property. Property-holding was contrary tothe basic stance of shramana lifestyle, the rejection of householding; nevertheless,there was already a custom of kings and pious laypeople providing grovesor buildings for the wandering ascetics to use for their meetings and rainyseason retreats. Wandering seekers often moved from one teacher to another,and the shramana stratum as a whole seems to have mingled rather promiscuouslyin such places. The Buddhists now pulled apart, acquiring retreatsset aside for themselves alone, and formulated rules as to how the membersof their communities were to comport themselves (Dutt, 1962: 53–57; Wijayaratna,1990). Although the Buddhists stressed the renunciation of individualproperty, they also formed organized settlements, and from a very earlyperiod—the Buddha’s own lifetime—acquired considerable collective propertyin the important kingdoms. The early Jainas were rivals of the Buddhists inthe same locations, such as Nalanda in Magadha, and in Vesali, capital of anearby rival kingdom to whose royal house Mahavira was related; and thisinstitutional competition must have been part of the engine of growth in bothmovements.223. The Buddhists became the most successful movement because they wereoriented toward acquiring the largest social base. Buddhism calls itself theExternal and Internal Politics: India • 203“Middle Path,” explicitly avoiding the extremes of asceticism as well as theindulgence of ordinary life. Meditation was turned into a practice of inwardconcentration, regulated to facilitate insight based on doctrinal understanding.Buddhists turned away from the more typical shramana path, which followedtraditions of tapas, extremes of self-denial and torture. Such austerities wereperhaps shamanistic in origin, referred to occasionally as far back as the earlyVedas. Tapas were believed to bring visions or magical powers; in the competitionamong the shramanas, they served as the most visible item of socialidentification. In the eyes of ordinary people, the ability to undergo wondrousself-inflicted hardships was the source of the shramanas’ emotional appeal, andwas a prime motivation for giving them alms. In rejecting tapas, the Buddhistsrisked undercutting their own social charisma. This was compensated in severalways.The shift to a moderate meditation practice must have greatly widened therecruitment base by making life as a monk more appealing. The rejection oftapas also shifted the focus from magical or charismatic impressiveness towardthe ethical purpose of the monastic life. On these points the Buddhists andJainas divided the turf. The Jainas continued more closely the tradition ofausterity, taking propertylessness to the extreme of going naked and contemptfor life to starving oneself to death. But the Jainas also went beyond tapas formagical purposes, emphasizing the moral point of their practices: to burn awaythe accumulated karma of evil action.The trump card of the Buddhists was their accommodation with the layworld. Although they were themselves withdrawn from the world into theirmonastic communities, at the same time they made a place for a continuingrelationship with their lay supporters. This was not just a matter of living offthe alms of laypeople, as did all shramanas. The Buddhists were the onlymovement which explicitly promoted missionary activities and made preachingto laypersons a central religious duty.23 The Buddhists were concernedto allow a modus vivendi between lay supporters and the world-denyingmonks; their rules held that a monk could not join without parental permission,and required that at least one son should remain to care for the family.This also ensured that lay families would be available to give alms to themonks. In this same vein were the good relations that the Buddha, as well asMahavira—themselves members of the aristocracy—kept up with kings andwealthy donors.Most important, Buddhism formulated not only a practice and a philosophyfor monks but also a simpler morality for laypeople. Killing, lying, stealing,and sexual improprieties were described as producing bad karma and a badrebirth. Moral behavior, as well as giving alms to the monks, produced goodkarma and good rebirth. Buddhism elevated the karma doctrine into a prop204 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsfor secular morality, as well as a motivation for monastic life. Buddhismbecame successful by filling the moral vacuum in the new social world ofcommerce and city life with a universalistic social morality which was lackingin both the Brahmanical and the shramana religions.Buddhism laid down a basic cultural framework for lay society whicheventually became Hinduism. Buddhism cannot be understood as a reactionagainst the caste system, any more than it is simply an effort to escape fromkarma. Just as karma and reincarnation were not considered a major problembefore the Buddha, it is likely that the caste system was only very looselyadumbrated at the time (Eliot, 1988: 1:xxii). It is apparent from the Upanishadsthat the prestige of the Brahmans was breaking down and their distinctnessfrom the political-military kshatriya caste was crumbling. Buddhism gavethe caste system renewed significance by making it part of one’s religious dutiesto carry out the activities proper to one’s station in life (Chakravarti, 1987:94–121, 180). Certainly, Buddhism was a challenge to the traditional Brahmanpractices, attacking its rituals and especially its sacrifices by the doctrine ofahimsa, non-harming. But Buddhism should be seen as more of a reform withinthe milieu of the educated religious people—who were mainly Brahmans—rather than a rival movement from outside. Thus, although the Buddha himselfwas a kshatriya, the largest number of monks in the early movement were ofBrahman origin.24 In principle, the sangha was open to any caste; and since itwas outside the ordinary world, caste had no place in it. Nevertheless, virtuallyall monks were recruited from the two upper classes. The biggest source of laysupport, however, the ordinary donors of alms, were the landowning farmers.Chakravarti (1987) points out that this gahapati group also constituted themain tax base for the emerging states of the period, whose kings were alliedwith the Buddha. For this group the Buddhists preached a secular morality,encouraging them to stay in the world, to respect their superiors, and, notincidentally, to provide the alms which the sangha needed to survive.The early Buddhists’ support of the caste system, like their dependence onthe concepts of karma and reincarnation, was another example of tying aprominent new doctrine to its apparent opposite. Buddhism gives the appearanceof being a protest against the caste system because it offers a solutionfrom reincarnation in the world where one has no control over one’s caste.But the solution and the problem are all part of the same intellectual situation.A successful philosophy—and a successful religion—formulates an entire problemspace, not just a solution.4. The turn toward meditation set Indian culture in the direction of Yogatechniques as a means of transcending the world. The Upanishadic sages didnot draw their insights from meditation, nor apparently did they practice itmuch. The tapas ascetics sought a kind of magical charisma. The BuddhistsExternal and Internal Politics: India • 205permeated meditation with an ethicized philosophy. Mysticism emerges nowin the sense of a philosophy of those who practice meditation. It might seemthat the mystical philosophy is derived from the experience of meditation: anaconceptual insight into what lies behind experience and which has a powerfulmotivating effect. The Buddhists refer to enlightenment, one of whose componentsis the experience of an inner light, and to the bliss of deep meditation.These might seem to be experiential inputs which shape the philosophy.Nevertheless, meditation is shaped by the direction of philosophy morethan the reverse. There are two sorts of reasons. Historical comparisons turnup a wide variety of techniques of meditation,25 and an equally great varietyof ways in which the experiences of meditation are interpreted.26 Meditativeexperiences do not speak for themselves, nor do they even occur without anunderstanding of what one is seeking, an understanding shaped by the socialgroup in which meditation takes place. Abstract or transcendental interpretationsof meditation do not appear until a community of intellectual debatershas developed abstract philosophy.A common interpretation holds that mysticism is a result of despair atworldly conditions. This would presumably apply only to the varieties ofmysticism which aim at otherworldly transcendence. But in fact the historicalcorrelation is not at all good. Buddhist mysticism originated in a time ofeconomic growth and unprecedented prosperity in the Ganges civilization. InChina, mysticism became important in the prosperous T’ang dynasty, and thespread of Ch’an monasteries was most pronounced during the late T’ang-Sungtransition, when the rural commercial economy was taking off; the height ofmedieval Chinese proto-capitalism, the late Sung, was the period when meditationspread into the Neo-Confucian movement.The more apt generalization is that otherworldly mysticism is especiallylikely to thrive in a social structure which favors monasticism. Periods whenmonasteries are expanding are high points of mysticism, and these are timeswhen monasteries are agents of economic growth in the countryside. Lay-orientedmovements of meditative practice, by contrast, have a strong organizationalpotential as a basis for political movements, especially in authoritariansocieties which allow no other means of political mobilization outside thearistocratic families. It is here—as in the Taoist political movements in China,the Sufi political movements in the Islamic world, and the Kabbalist movementsin medieval Judaism—that mysticism turns into political activism. Of anothersort are the hedonistic-intellectualistic versions of mysticism, such as the “Sagesof the Bamboo Grove” of the Three Kingdoms period in China, or the occultismof educated Europeans around 1900, revived in the psychedelic “counterculture”of 1960s hippies. These take place in prosperous, even pamperedsocial classes; if such movements sometimes coincide with times of political up-206 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsheaval, that is not so much because mysticism is a compensation as becausestate and religious regimentation have lost their grip, allowing exploration ofwhat was previously heretical or disreputable.Max Weber ([1922] 1968: 503–505) advanced a narrower interpretationof the rise of salvation-oriented mysticism: it is embraced by a decliningaristocracy losing its political power to the centralizing state. Thus the Buddha,a prince of the Shakya tribe on the fringes of the expanding Ganges states,would have been motivated by declining political fortunes. Mahavira, founderof Jainism, came from a similar political background. But this argument doesnot hold up either as a generalization or in the particulars of the Indian case.A survey of declining aristocracies would hardly show that their generaltendency is toward otherworldly mystical religion. The displacement of thearistocracy by the absolutist state in Europe during the 1600s and 1700scontributed no trend toward world-escaping mysticism. In Japan, the aristocracysupported Buddhist mysticism most strongly during the feudal period1300–1600, when the political alliance between the rural monasteries and aristocraticpower was at its height; during the displacement of Japanese aristocracyby the Tokugawa bureaucracy after 1600, Buddhism declined among theupper classes and was replaced by Confucianism. In India, the status of thekshatriyas was not declining preceding the rise of Buddhism, and in any casethe main recruitment base of Buddhism was the Brahmans.The biggest question left unanswered by these deprivation-compensationexplanations of mysticism is why the mystics were so socially honored. It isconceivable that hard times might motivate a certain class of individuals towithdraw from social life; but why should the rest of the society honor themfor doing so? The movement of shramanas, from which Buddhism and Jainismgrew, consisted of holy alms men who could exist only because their socialprestige was spreading, motivating a widening tendency to give alms. Here wesee one connection between increased social prosperity and mysticism: themystics’ dropping out from society presupposes increased economic surplus tosupport them. The successful expansion of the Buddhist movement, with itssurge of monasteries and monuments, depended on a growing economy, togetherwith increased political organization capable of extracting and channelingsurplus.27There remains the question why shramanas, and subsequently monks,become the bearers of so much social charisma. This happened at a time whenthe means of emotional production were newly expanding, and the means ofintellectual production as well; in both dimensions the center of these newmedia was the free-floating community of non-householders. The shramanasplayed on the emotional capital of techniques for violating the ordinary,especially in their grotesque displays of asceticism. This was facilitated by olderExternal and Internal Politics: India • 207traditions of magic, now enhanced by the scale of the mass movements ofwanderers, whose concentration in great assemblies like those we find in theearly Buddhist texts constituted a social technology of Durkheimian interactionrituals producing unprecedented amounts of emotional energy. The monksfurther expanded the reach of this charisma by the emotional appeals of moralpreaching, filling a vacuum in the surrounding society of new commercial andpolitical relations outside the traditional kinship structures. The Buddhist-Jainaversion of mysticism now connoted the highest moral respectability, and laypersonsgained moral status by their homage to it, and by offering materialsupport. By now an intellectual community had formed which interpreted theemotional highs of meditative experience as the highest point on all religiousdimensions, a fusion of moral and ontological peaks.It is because Buddhist mysticism, and its later Hindu counterpart, existedin the context of these social relationships that meditation had such a charismaticstatus. For this reason, movements in the modern West to transplantmysticism seem doomed to failure. The technique and the philosophy can berevived, but the practice is individual, or at best takes place in religiouscommunities which are private and without honor from the surroundingcommunity. Meditative mysticism in Europe or the Americas becomes littlemore than private occultism, lacking in social charisma. It is doubtful whetheranyone in our own time—at least outside of south Asia—can become enlightenedin the sense that ancient and medieval persons could have experienced.Anti-monastic Opposition and the Forming of Hindu Lay CultureThe consolidation of monastic organization made Buddhism the center ofreligious and intellectual life. This in turn gave rise to a slowly developingmovement of opposition. The main organizational base which remained consistedof the lay householders who served as teachers and ritualists, that is, theBrahmans. But now they acquired new intellectual contents to keep up withthe monastic trendsetters. This took place in three ways.First, the residue of the freelance sages, those who remained outside themonastic orders, collected under the auspices of Brahmanical education. Thiswas the period when most of the Upanishads were formulated; that is, thestories of various sages were collected as texts appended to one or another ofthe Vedas. Although a few Upanishads (the Brihadaranyaka and Chandogya)precede Buddhism, and several others may be contemporary with its rise, theso-called Middle Upanishads were created ca. 350–200 b.c.e., and some datefrom around 200 c.e. or even later.28 Together these constituted the set ofUpanishads that came to be considered classic texts of Hinduism, but onlyafter Shankara turned them into an orthodox canon around 700 c.e. Therewas in fact a good deal of selection to be made, since texts calling themselves208 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsUpanishads continued to be written even later: for instance, Yoga-Upanishadswere eventually appended to the Yogasutra, compiled around 500 c.e., andthe Shaiva, Shakti, and Vaishnava sects all composed their own Upanishads,some as late as 1300 c.e. The prestige of Hindu orthodoxy became attachedto having an Upanishad for one’s particular doctrine, but only, it would seem,after around 200–400 c.e. The contents of the “classic” Upanishads, thosecollected during the phase when an anti-Buddhist syncretism was being builtup, show no sense of orthodoxy at all, and in fact offer a rather pervasivecriticism of traditional Brahmanism. Yet most custodians of the Vedic textswere impelled, no doubt by weakness, to ally with their critics; those Vedistswho held out against the Upanishadic movement revived later, when Hinduismgathered strength, as Mimamsa. The Upanishads’ contents suggest great diversityof opinions in the Brahman camp during this time, with nothing yetcrystallizing into a doctrinal rallying point (see Figure 5.2).The second process consisted in defining a distinctive Hindu social identity.The first clear indications are the law books of Manu and of Yajñavalkya, bothattributed to ancient or mythical figures, but reaching their canonical formsaround 200 c.e.29 These books lay out caste duties and prohibitions and theirpenalties. This was essentially a new development. In ancient times, the fourvarnas were primarily a categorization scheme; the Vedas carried no prohibitionsabout commensualism or intermarriage. There were, however, a largenumber of jatis, originally probably tribal lineage groups; it was the latterwhich became organized, through the work of the Brahman legists, as castesand fitted into a Vedic ideology.The caste system expanded into secular life as a regulative code of socialand economic transactions. From now on new social relations were constructedby creating distinctions among subcastes; henceforward any occupational,kin-linked, or regional group had to compete for status by instituting its ownpurity and marriage rules in emulation of the Brahmans. A new relationdeveloped between the Brahmans and the state: caste laws were to be enforcedby political officials, but they had no autonomy to makes laws, instead relyingon the learned Brahmans. Moreover, the center of gravity shifted toward thelocal arena as Brahmans became economically central to the village. Theirrituals regulated every activity, while collecting fees for their performance;resistance was crushed by the threat of ritual exclusion from the division oflabor. Caste laws now controlled everything from guilds and interest rates tocriminal penalties. Domestic rituals become the vehicles of family propertytransfers and independence of householders (Smith, 1989: 148–149; Moore,1966: 319–337). The transformation of the Brahman priests into their newrole as linchpin of the caste system was simultaneously the transformation ofthe functioning property system.Caste regulation grew over a long period as the states lost control of landedExternal and Internal Politics: India • 209FIGURE 5.2. INDIA, 400 B.C.E.–400 C.E.:AGE OF ANONYMOUS TEXTSrevenue, with a key transition perhaps at the downfall of the Guptas andcoming fully into place only around 1000–1200 (OHI, 1981: 63). The politicalascendancy of Hinduism, and its displacement of Buddhism’s political andsocial base, came about by this indirect route. The Brahmans’ influence spreadin the regions of weak or formative states; by controlling law, they became themore enduring element in Indian social organization, whose power was neverchallenged by the series of ephemeral states. Here Indian social structure tooka fundamental turn onto a path contrasting with that of China or Rome, wherethe administration of law was dominated by government officials. This structuralrelation between Brahmans as hereditary monopolists of the law and theweak state was a basic cause of the pattern which Louis Dumont (1980) andMurray Milner, Jr. (1994), have seen as the autonomy of a pure hierarchic orstatus principle over economic and power stratification.Hinduism acquired its definition by its opposition to the monastic movements.The law books mark the point when Buddhism and Jainism becamesystematically denounced as “heterodox” (nastika). Reverence for the sacrificesenjoined in the Vedas became the criterion.30 The Brahman intellectuals nowallied around their traditional ritual practice, downplaying the criticism ofVedic sacrifices which pervades the Upanishads. The new emphasis was onfinding a rallying point which would clearly separate the Brahmans from theritual practice of their monastic rivals. But although ideological continuity wasstressed, a revolution had taken place in the social practice of Vedic rituals.The old Vedas and Brahmanas had promulgated large public sacrifices, carriedout by Brahman priests in attendance on the kings. A grand ritual like thehorse sacrifice was a claim for political overlordship. Strong rulers such asAshoka suppressed such rituals by rivals to their own power; yet as theBrahmans found a more valuable niche by controlling local social relationships,the expensive and ostentatious public sacrifices became unnecessary. In theirplace were put a new class of domestic rituals regulating the occasions ofeveryday life, cheaper but reaping a reward of consistent social control. Theideological work of transforming Brahman prestige from one activity to anothercame about by interpreting the smaller and inward sacrifices as emblemsof the larger (Smith, 1989: 120, 143–145, 193–196).In the third phase, a self-consciously “orthodox” Hinduism challengedBuddhism intellectually. Now occurred the formation of philosophical traditions,darshanas, engaging in debates with the Buddhists. This phase culminatedaround 700 in what might be called the “Advaita revolution.” Hinduismappropriated the core of Buddhist philosophy, its anti-materialism and aconceptualmysticism, at just the time when Buddhism was institutionally on itslast legs in India.Whereas Buddhist monasticism flourished best in strong state-building re-External and Internal Politics: India • 211gions, Hinduism spread most successfully where there was a large-scale migrationand cultural influx into a previously unorganized tribal area, setting offemulative formation of subcastes along lines of ritual purity. In the latterrespect, Hinduism is similar to Judaism after the destruction of its temple beganits period of depoliticization and diaspora. The rabbi is something like theIndian pandit: both were laymen and householders, with little or no organizationaround church property, salaries, and hierarchy. Religious leadershipmerged with the lay status system, giving a special charisma to the possessionof education. Both diaspora Judaism and pandit-centered Hinduism emphasizedritual purity, thereby structuring group barriers through commensualismand marriage. Hinduism is a more extreme version of the organizational formsof diaspora Judaism. The Hindu diaspora over the multiethnic Indian subcontinentoccurred in circumstances of weak and ephemeral states, where no rivalreligion predominated, whereas Judaism survived under Roman, Persian, andIslamic states in the niches for conquered peoples allowed by the state-alliedreligions. Hinduism is what Judaism might have become if fragmented politicalconditions had left all the other circum-Mediterranean ethnic groups to competewith and emulate Jewish ritual purity.The great Hindu epics which crystallized the identity of Hinduism as apopular culture began the reinterpretation of previous Indian traditions. Thesetexts, which arrived at canonical status around 400 or 500 c.e., are exercisesin anachronism (Van Buitenen, 1973: xxi–xxxix). The name Mahabharataextols the territory of “great Bharata” (i.e., the Punjab, the ancestral Vedichomeland in the northwest), while its action is set in the period of the originalAryan migration into the lower Ganges. The Ramayana contains a mythicalversion of the colonization of Sri Lanka, which had been carried out by settlersescaping the cage of the centralized Ganges states around 500–200 b.c.e. Bothepics are a kind of anti-Buddhist propaganda, depicting Hindu conquest ofterritories—Bihar and Sri Lanka—which at the time of writing were the mainBuddhist strongholds.31 The period in which the bulk of these epics waswritten, ca. 200 b.c.e.–200 c.e., coincides with the outpouring of Mahayanasutras, as well as with a Buddhist epic by the poet Ashvaghosha, written as ifin rivalry with the new fame of the Hindu poems (ca. 80 c.e.; Nakamura,1980: 133–35). Hindu and Buddhist texts now began to make extravagantclaims for the antiquity of their cultures, the Buddhists by inventing cosmicincarnations of the Buddha who lived in prior eons; this feature was imitatedby the Jainas, who list a series of 24 Tirthankaras (exalted founders) prior toMahavira, some going back millions of years. Now sets in the contest of “moreancient than thou,” which displaced the prestige of doctrinal innovations foundamong the Upanishadic sages and in early Buddhism, and which henceforwarddistorted Indians’ conceptions of their own history.212 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsPartitioning the Intellectual Attention SpaceUpon these slowly shifting social bases arose the long-term networks whichconstituted the intellectual community in India. Let us envision this networkof intergenerational continuities and conflicting factions as the actor, and thenames of individual philosophers, famous or otherwise, as surges of intellectualactivity produced by the network. Why does creativity occur at particular timesand in particular conceptual regions? We may trace this process through threemajor phases: (1) the early period of Buddhist domination, when Buddhismunderwent a large number of sectarian splits; (2) the period of challenge toBuddhism by Hindu darshanas, an apex of creativity on both sides; and (3)the struggles within Hindu philosophy after the demise of Buddhism.The Victorious Proliferation of Buddhist Sectarian PhilosophiesBuddhism rapidly expanded for its first 10 or 15 generations, first in northernIndia, then throughout the subcontinent. During this time Buddhism underwentnumerous divisions, somewhat over-schematically attributed to a successionof seven schisms. Within 6 generations or so after the Buddha’s death,there were 18 recognized sects; overall, scholars have assembled the names of34 factions, and suggested that there may have been as many as 200.32 Thepattern is in keeping with the principle that strong schools subdivide to fillintellectual space (see Figure 5.3).How can we account for fractionation on this scale, far beyond the upperlimits of the intellectual law of small numbers? Doctrinal differences amongmost of these “schools” were minor. Some are organizational lineages ofmonasteries; others are labels subsuming a variety of positions; some arevariant names for the same school or for its different generations over time.Even allowing for this simplification, we are left with many more factions thanthe half dozen which the law of small numbers says is the maximal numberof distinctively memorable positions which can sustain themselves across time.The answer is that the law of small numbers applies to intellectual positionsrather than to the number of organizations per se. Organizations do notcompete if they find separate geographical bases or resource niches. But intellectualfactions, by their very nature, compete in the universal attention space;if they become specialized or localized, they simply do not receive any widerecognition, and are obscured behind those that do. That is what the intellectuallaw of small numbers means. Buddhist fractionation reflects both kindsof conditions. On one level were conditions external to intellectual life: issuesof monastic discipline, geographical dispersion, disciples of particular leaders.On the second level intellectual differences emerge. It appears that organiza-External and Internal Politics: India • 213FIGURE 5.3. LINEAGES OF BUDDHIST SECTS, 400 B.C.E.–900 C.E.214 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathstional splits were much the more numerous, and that divergence among intellectualpositions is about what one would expect from the law of smallnumbers.For the period down to the beginning of the Common Era, our ability toreconstruct a network is very imprecise. The names of significant individualthinkers are only occasionally known. Figure 5.3 shows the approximatestructure of the organizational fractionation, subject to some disagreement overdates and genealogical connections and to spelling variants.The first great schism occurred at the Second Council, about 100 yearsafter the death of the Buddha. The issues were not at all philosophical or eventheological, but matters of discipline. At issue was a crisis of institutionalizationfor a newly successful movement. The Mahasanghikas, or “majority ofthe council,” favored loosening the ascetic rules and allowing monasteries toaccumulate property. The Sthaviras, followers of the “way of the Elders,”upheld the tradition of the wandering alms men. The Buddhist movement hadno headquarters or hierocratic succession; councils were general meetingsamong the independent monasteries, without means of enforcing church unity.Both the Mahasanghikas and Sthaviras underwent a series of fractionationsover the next 200 years. We may group the outcomes into four main campswhich acquired distinctive intellectual lines.1. The Pudgalavadins, branching off from the side of the Elders, held thatthere is a pudgala, or “person,” over and above the bundle of aggregates whichmakes up human experience. This was a first-order heresy in Buddhism, sincea basic tenet was the non-existence of a self. The Pudgalavadins, however, didprovide an answer to a favorite early debating point: If there is no soul, whatis it that is reincarnated from one life to another? The Pudgalavadins seem tohave undergone a number of short-lived organizational sub-splits, or perhapsthey are merely referred to by one well-known leader after another. Nevertheless,their main doctrine remained constant throughout the life of the sect. ThePudgalavada was one of the longest-lived Buddhist sects; it was still one of thefour largest during the 600s c.e., and members remained down to the end ofIndian Buddhism around 1200.2. The root-lineage Sthaviras, under their Pali name Theravadins, alsoremained stable and conservative in doctrine. Originally the Theravadins werestrong in western India (the home of the Pali dialect); they owed their survival,as well as their doctrinal conservatism, to the fact that they were the sect whichhad colonized Sri Lanka about 250 b.c.e., where they remained entrenched,despite various political vicissitudes, down to the 1900s (Gombrich, 1988).Their philosophical doctrine, the basis of which they shared with the Sarvastivadins,was an Abhidharma scholasticism.3. Another large set of sects branches from the Sthaviras. The best knownExternal and Internal Politics: India • 215are the Sarvastivadins, among the most philosophically oriented sects. Theirname itself is philosophical, meaning “everything-exists theorists.” Sharinglineage links with them, or possibly branching off from them, is a group calledVibhajyavadins, “those who make distinctions”; one of these groups survivedas a numerically important sect down into the Gupta era. The doctrinalpositions of most of these sects are not known, with the exception of theSarvastivadins, and their fission, the Sautrantikas. What we are probably seeinghere is a long-term effect of the law of small numbers: the philosophicaldifferences among the sects were obscured over the centuries of competitionfor intellectual attention; only the most distinctive positions were remembered,and only their texts were propagated and developed.Buddhist meditation involves taking experience apart into its elements untilone realizes that there is among these elements no self to which one can beattached. The Abhidharma, held in common by most of the early sects, comprisedlists of the elements of which experience is composed. These numberedlists, no doubt a mnemonic device from a time when transmission was oral,grew far beyond their practical relevance for achieving enlightenment. Scholasticpedantry grew over the generations, and various classifications wereadded—the 5 skandas (“aggregates”), 12 sense fields, 18 elements (6 senseorgans, 6 sense objects, 6 sense consciousnesses)—together with sub- andcross-classifications; in some sects the total number of dharmas (elements)reached as many 75, 82, or 100 (in the late Yogacara), while types of causalrelations among them numbered 24 (Nakamura, 1980: 125–126; Guenther,1976; Conze, 1962: 178–179). Intellectual acuteness also grew; as definitionsof the elements were refined, ontological and epistemological issues emerged.Buddhist meditation takes its distinctiveness from the doctrine of dependentorigination, the chain of causation which leads to reincarnation in the phenomenalworld. This soteriology, when formalized by professional teachers,developed into a more abstract issue regarding the dependence that leads fromone element of experience to another. The nature of causation was to beBuddhism’s major contribution and challenge to the rest of Indian philosophy.Potter (1976) argues that most of the positions of Indian philosophy can bearrayed across the space of possible stances on this issue.The Sarvastivadins, concerned to show how dependent origination operatesamong their long list of elements, took the position that “everything exists,”including past and future. The so-called objects of everyday life are not real,for they are mere transitory aggregates, but the elements of which theseaggregates are composed are real and permanent. The Sarvastivadins wererealists about the world constituents; the one item they were at pains to showdoes not exist is the subjective self. The dharmas have their own self-naturesor essences which exist eternally; indeed, all three time-periods are real sub-216 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsstances. Even unmanifested karma is regarded as a type of matter. This omnirealismprobably developed from epistemological argument. The Sarvastivadinsheld that no true cognition is possible without a real object; if past andfuture did not exist, nor any of the non-substantial dharmas, we could notcognize them (Conze, 1962: 137–141; Guenther, 1972: 43–47, 65).Now there emerged lines of genuine philosophical disagreement among theBuddhists. The Sarvastivadins, centered in Kashmir, underwent a schism oftheir branch in Gandhara which become the Sautrantikas, those who reject theAbhidharma and claim to return to the sutras. The Sautrantikas rejected thedoctrine of the intentionality of consciousness by which the Sarvastivadinsdefended their realism. Instead, they distinguished between the things of experience,which exist but only as transitory point-instants of space-time; andnon-concrete categories, which do not exist; the latter are permanent and realbut only as abstractions. There is a non-referential aspect of mind wherebydharmas which are not existing substances can be objects of valid cognition.The Sautrantikas were phenomenalists about the world, nominalists aboutgeneral categories. Whereas the Sarvastivadins held that dependent originationis an interlocking net of simultaneously existing causal elements, the Sautrantikaswere the first to emphasize that there is no causality except in temporalsequences. The world, although independently existing, is a flux of evanescentinstantaneous beings (Guenther, 1972: 75–76).Another variant, the Kashyapiyas, tried to pare down the scope of dependentorigination. Taking another stance in the array opened up by the Sarvastivadins,they held that only that part of the past exists which continues to havean effect on the present, and only that part of the future exists which is inherentin the present. The Sarvastivada-Sautrantika split, sometimes referred to as theseventh Buddhist schism, came near the end of the period of division of theold Buddhist sects, around 100 b.c.e. These philosophical positions were tobe the background from which emerged the critical philosophy of Nagarguna.4. Meanwhile, the other major branch of Buddhist sectarianism, the Mahasanghika,was also subdividing. Some of the subsects were developing philosophicalpositions. The Vetulyakas (around the time of the third schism, ca.300 b.c.e.) held that nothing has its own nature, but instead all the elementsare void (shunya). This has the ring of a direct opposition to the Sarvastivadins,and also foreshadows Nagarjuna. The Uttarapathakas (in the fourth or fifthschism) interpreted each element not as void, but not as determinate either inthe sense of the Sarvastivadin realism; instead each thing was said to have itsown-nature (tathata, or “thusness”), an inexplicable indexicality which bringsto the fore the radical particularity of existence. Around the same time, abranch known as the Andhakas took a more radical departure from Buddhisttradition by moving toward a form of idealism. The objects of mind were heldExternal and Internal Politics: India • 217to be the same as mindfulness itself. Furthermore, meditation arrives at a steadyconsciousness which is not momentary, but shows an immutable nature beneaththe phenomenal changes. The Andhakas were still operating in theAbhidharma mode of classification, but they added nirvana itself to the list ofelements and gave it a controlling function; nirvana became a skanda pullingthe human individual toward liberation. This doctrinal shift brought the Andhakasinto debate both with the lineages of the Elders and with the otherMahasanghikas.Other splits among the Mahasanghikas came from theological innovations.33 The Lokottaravadins held that the body of the Buddha is supra-mundane(lokottara); the historical Buddha who appeared in the world was onlyan appearance, as indeed is the mundane world in general (Conze, 1962: 163).The Chaitiyas, located in the southern kingdom of Andhra, were apparentlystupa worshippers, in contrast to orthodox monastic meditators. The Mahasanghikasgenerally came to hold that the body of the Buddha pervades theuniverse, and that there is a plurality of Buddhas, including transmundaneones. One can see a number of trends in the direction of Mahayana, whichappears to have arisen largely out of the Mahasanghika sects, and especiallythe Andhakas.The Mahayana is not a sect in quite the same way as the others. It seemsto have emerged both inside the monasteries and, perhaps more important,among lay orders. There is a connection between early Mahayana or proto-Mahayana and the stupas, mound-shaped reliquaries or monuments (Hirakawa,1990: 256–274). These were established and kept up by lay donors asalternative centers of worship and teaching outside monastic routine. Doctrinally,the Mahayana innovations downplayed the monk seeking individualsalvation, and extolled the Bodhisattva, who continues in the world to preachsalvation to everyone. Such a doctrine would have exalted the status of thesemi-professional staff of caretakers at the stupas and the lay orders whichsurrounded them. Original Buddhism had won its organizational advantageover its early rival meditative orders by forging stronger ties to lay donors andproviding a morality for laypeople. Mahayana was a revival of and expansiontoward this lay base.Mahayana practice turned away from the prolonged meditative exercisesof the monks. It elevated the ceremonial making of vows, which might also betaken by laypersons. The physical text itself became the focus of ritual worship;copying and reciting scriptures became major acts of religious merit.34 Mahayanaemerged as a set of scriptures alleging new revelations from the mouth ofthe Buddha; and it was by a copying campaign that these scriptures spread.Such newly appearing scriptures were of course scandalous to the learnedmonks (Nakamura, 1980: 151). They were justified by the doctrines of the218 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathssupra-mundane and trans-historical Buddhas, so that new sutras were attributednot to the Shakyamuni Buddha of the Elders but to inspiration from someprior or current Buddha. The reincarnation doctrine must have been given aboost at this time by its added usefulness in legitimating Mahayana andits practitioners. Popular Mahayana gave rise to a variety of new religiouspaths: beliefs in rebirth in a Pure Land, a paradise presided over by one of thefuture Buddhas; worship of Vairocana Buddha, an all-pervasive cosmic God;prayers to merciful and world-intervening Bodhisattvas. These innovationsadded many alternatives to monastic meditation, especially lay rituals, as wellas promoting rather naive theistic beliefs that undercut the philosophical pathof detachment from a cosmos of illusory permanences.There was no sharp or prolonged split between lay-oriented Buddhism andthe monastic life. It appears that the phase of enthusiastic Mahayanist laymovements did not last long in India. Mahayana had no vinaya disciplinaryrules of its own, and became not so much a development of separate monasteriesas a movement within existing monasteries (Dutt, 1962: 176; Hirakawa,1990: 308–311). The Bodhisattva path did not negate what came to be calledthe Pratyekabuddha (“private Buddha”) path, but added another level ofreligious status beyond it. When Mahayana first crystallized, there was a phaseof hostility to “Hinayana”; the Lotus sutra (compiled in the first two centuriesof the Common Era) derided early Buddhism as the “lesser path” and itsteachings as provisional expressions for an unsophisticated audience. Aboutthe same time the Vimalkirti sutra depicted a layman achieving an enlightenmentsuperior to that of the monks. Nevertheless, in the centuries that followed,we find Mahayana monks in the same monasteries as Hinayana; thismixing was facilitated by the shift toward central monastic centers or “universities,”the mahavihara (“great monastery”) complexes where all the varioussects resided and taught. Stupa worship decayed; Mahayana became a movementagain largely consisting of monks.Such sequences repeat many times in Indian religious history. Monasticorganizations generate a new focus for social charisma, which becomes monopolizedby full-time specialists, leading to emulation by lay movements. Inturn the latter, when successful, develop a professionalized elite who becomemonastic specialists in their own right. We see this in the development of layMahayana from monastic Buddhism and its reabsorption into monasticism; inthe borrowing of Buddhist and Jaina doctrines and meditation practices by layHindus, eventually culminating in the Advaita monks founded by Shankara;and again in the dialectic between Vaishnava orders and the popular bhaktimovements which spin off from them. The continuous expansion of the marketfor religious charisma cycles through institutionalized and deinstitutionalizedforms.External and Internal Politics: India • 219From the point of view of intellectual fractionation and the law of smallnumbers, we may regard the Mahayana-Hinayana split as a framework whichbrought intellectual life into focus around some four to six significant schools.The multiple splits within the Sthaviras dried up by around the time Mahayanaappeared. But this regrouped “Hinayana” remained strong; from reports ofChinese visitors in the 400s and again in the 600s, their monks outnumberedthe Mahayanists by about three to one (Hirakawa, 1990: 119–123).Hinayana now boiled down to the Sarvastivadins taking the intellectual lead,with some dissent from the Sautrantikas, who were however gradually reabsorbedinto the Sarvastivadins, plus the Theravadins, and, off on the fringe,the Pudgalavadins, with their soul heresy. On the other side of the first schism,the Mahasanghikas, for all their proto-Mahayanist tendencies, remained alarge independent sect into the 600s. Mahayana, though it had a number oftheological variants (Pure Land, Vairocana, various quasi-theist cults), had onlytwo main representatives in the philosophical attention space: Madhyamika,as developed by Nagarjuna, and Yogacara. The background of multiple organizationalfractionation boiled down in the intellectual attention space to amanageable number of philosophies.Philosophies on the New Mahayana BaseWithin the philosophical world strictly speaking, Mahayana doctrine did notdetermine a particular stance. Theologies of Boddhisattvas, cosmic Buddhas,and Pure Lands did not entail a particular epistemology or even a metaphysics.Mahayana philosophers became distinctive by taking up the slots available foropposition within the lineup of existing Hinayana philosophies. Sarvastivadinsheld a realist and pluralist position, with the Sautrantikas taking a nominalistslant and stressing the momentariness of all phenomena; the Mahasanghikas,closer to Mahayana theology, were still pluralists, with their innumerableBuddhas, but the Andhakas had moved toward idealist monism. The mostsuccessful Mahayana philosophers carved out positions which outflanked theirphilosophical opponents’; no doubt they chose only a few of the many positionsthat could have been made compatible with Mahayana theology.Ashvagosha, around 100 c.e., is identified as the first famous individualphilosopher in Buddhism, although it is possible that a somewhat later philosophywas propagated under his name (Dutt, 1962: 277–278; Nakamura,1980: 232; Raju, 1985: 157). Ashvagosha was the most famous of a Buddhistcircle of court poets, and whose epics rivaled the contemporary Ramayana,suggesting the emergence at this time of a cosmopolitan attention spaceon which individuals were competing for intellectual reputation. Ashvagoshalooks like a traditional Abhidharma philosopher of the Sarvastivadin type,accepting the empirical reality of the 5 aggregates, the 12 bases, and the 18220 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathselements. But the nature of these items is indiscernible, an indexical “suchness.”Ashvagosha raised this “suchness” to the ultimate reality of the universe andidentified it with the “womb of Buddha,” tathagatagarbha; it was a monistorigin from which pluralism emanated through the traditional 12–link chainof causation. Ashvagosha’s “suchness” provided an alternative path betweenSarvastivada realism, Sautrantika nominalism, and the somewhat inconsistentmentalism of some of the Mahasanghikas.A generation or two later, Nagarjuna eclipsed Ashvagosha while takingmuch the same space among the opposing philosophies. Whereas Ashvagoshaseems an ambiguous precursor to Mahayana, Nagarjuna was the great Mahayanastandard bearer, giving his theological movement a famous success inthe most recondite philosophical arguments. For Nagarjuna, ultimate realitywas not merely “thusness” but shunyata, emptiness. This was in keeping withthe emphasis on emptiness in the Lotus sutra, the leading Mahayana scripture,finished during or shortly after Nagarjuna’s lifetime. Nagarjuna, however, didnot leave his position simply as a negation; not only did this sound like apessimism which he did not wish to imply, but also negation would have beenon the same level of analysis as the realism of the Sarvastivadins, which hecombatted, and the constructs of other philosophical factions.Nagarjuna rose to a meta-level. He defended a position which may beregarded as classically Buddhist; but he acquired his great personal reputationnot merely as a conservative overturning the accretions of the Abhidharmascholastics, but by introducing an explicit concern for the standards of argument.All arguments hinge on a concept of identity, the nature of the itemsthat are argued about. Nagarjuna undermined identity by using the classicBuddhist model of causality: all things are caused by dependent origination;therefore nothing has an essence of its own, standing outside the stream ofcausation; therefore everything is void. Identity turns out to be the same asshunyata (Nakamura, 1980: 247–249; Sprung, 1979: 4–11; Streng, 1967;Robinson, 1967). Nagarjuna’s criterion of being is like Parmenides’: the selfexistentmust not be dependent on anything else; but—unlike in Parmenides—no such thing exists. Nagarjuna used this argumentation to refute the realismof the Sarvastivadins. There is neither future nor past nor any motion; everythingis substanceless. By Nagarjuna’s strict criterion, no concepts are intelligible.Hence, Nagarjuna could assert these skeptical statements as a positivedoctrine. His omni-negation applies to his own philosophy, holding itself tobe a “theory of no-theory.” Like some Greek Skeptics, Nagarjuna soughttranquillity through disengagement from intellectual positions; but, unlike theGreeks, he had an institutionalized religion to defend. One must operate withlevels of two-fold truth: the truths of religious life within the world, and theultimate truth of Mahayana, which is inexpressible.Nagarjuna’s doctrine is called “Madhyamika,” the superlative of the mid-External and Internal Politics: India • 221dle; it steers between the previous camps of the philosophical world, realismand nihilism, or rather rises above them. In one respect its philosophicalcontent is traditionalistic, with nothing of Mahayana avant-garde theologyabout it. One of its implications, however, is taken to justify the Mahayanastance. Since everything is void, nirvana is not different from samsara; theworld of phenomena is itself the realm of enlightenment. One does not haveto leave, to transcend in meditation, to do anything special to reach freedomfrom attachments. Madhyamika omni-negation revives the world of phenomenaand allows them to be interpreted as part of the cosmic Buddha—who isafter all void as well. This line of argument was emphasized by later Madhyamikathinkers. Chandrakirti (600s) explains that the negativity of shunyatais the negation of the “essential nature” or “thing-in-itself” of the Sarvastivadins,not the negation of life-as-lived. This brings Madhyamika into line withthe theology of the Boddhisattvas remaining on earth to bring salvation to allsentient beings; in true recognition, they already have it.An omni-skeptical position like Nagarjuna’s Madhyamika was designed toend philosophical debate. Nevertheless, Nagarjuna was just the beginning ofthe great period of Buddhist philosophy. Far from fading, the Hinayana positionsacquired their most famous representatives. Mahayana philosophers aswell found additional slots in the attention space besides Nagarjuna’s. TheYogacara school emerged in the 300s c.e., coinciding with the last big outputof Mahayana sutras and their attacks on the Hinayana. There is a chain offamous thinkers: Maitreyanatha, the founder, who acquired such a reputationthat he was later turned into a mythological figure, the Buddha Maitreya; hispupil Asanga; and the latter’s half-brother Vasubandhu I.35Yogacara built upon epistemological disputes in its sectarian lineage. TheSarvastivadins held that consciousness always implies an object because theknower cannot know itself but only something else (Guenther, 1972: 16, 66,92). They had set out to formalize the Buddhist doctrine of taking apartordinary objects into underlying elements; but their reductionism and antimentalismlanded them in a similar problem as the logical positivists of theVienna Circle: the difficulty of defining all meaningful expressions in restrictedlyobjective terms (Griffiths, 1986: 50–51). In both cases a bifurcationdeveloped, in which logical realities were recognized alongside elementarysubstances; the Sautrantikas posited a level of logical abstractions, althoughallowing them only nominal existence. Yogacara extended further this non-referentialconsciousness by accepting pure mental experience. One cognizespatches of color and shapes of objects; cognitions do not disclose independentlyexisting objects but only reveal object-like mental images. It is only the relationof externality, supplied by consciousness, which makes objects appear as if theyexist. In a reversal of the Sarvastivadin position, there is in fact nothing but222 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsnon-referential consciousness; the apparent world is merely “consciousnessrepresenting itself to itself” (Griffiths, 1986: 102).Asanga approached the epistemological issue from the point of view of theMadhyamika doctrine of emptiness, which allowed him to assert the emptinessof the external world; at a deeper level consciousness too is void, althoughthe voidness of the phenomenal levels are, so to speak, derivative of it. Theearly formulators of Yogacara may well have had no intention of goingbeyond Madhyamika. Nevertheless, Yogacara already was moving beyondMadhyamika’s omni-skepticism and anti-metaphysical stance. Yogacara wasa full-fledged scholasticism; it extended the Abhidharma texts which Madhyamikahad repudiated.Yogacara represents the penetration of Mahayana into the core of thetraditional scholasticizing monasteries and the abandoning of its lay rootswhich took place around this time. Asanga was concerned mainly to providea systematic guide to meditation techniques, and to describe how the worldappears as ideas in meditative experience, rather than actually to deny theexistence of objects (as distinct from asserting their voidness) or to stress thefoundational role of consciousness (Nagao, 1991; Willis, 1979). As its nameimplies, Yogacara was the specialty of the professional meditators; and theirtechnical tradition too had grown scholastic over the generations. Whereasthe Theravadins and Sarvastivadins had recognized 3 samadhis, the Prajñaparamita-sutras recognized 152 trances or “doorways to nirvana”; theAvatamsaka-sutra, completed contemporaneously with Asanga around 350c.e. (Nakamura, 1980: 194–195), listed 250. Trance states themselves wereranked and became criteria for levels of salvation, and thus for social rankingamong the monks. The differentiation of meditative levels paralleled the inflationof ranks within the community; the Sthaviras had recognized 3 categoriesof enlightenment, whereas the later Abhidharmists categorized dozens of kindsof Arhats and Never-Returners, and Yogacarins such as Asanga described asmany as 50 ranks at the Mahayana super-level of Boddhisattvas.36 Ontologydifferentiated correspondingly; by the 700s, late Buddhist scholasticism wasdividing ultimate nothingness into 16 types under 4 headings. Yogacara couldnot help becoming philosophically innovative as it sought to explain thedifferences among meditative ranks. Whereas Madhyamika emphasized salvationthrough a simplifying, skeptical wisdom, Yogacara made salvation dependenton a very complex training process of mastering many refinements ofmeditation simultaneously with their philosophical basis.However loyal and traditionalist the originators of Yogacara may havebeen, their position was soon being interpreted as a distinctive school offull-fledged idealism, Vijñanavada, consciousness-theory. It acquired a prominentposition in the attention space, as the opposite of Sarvastivadin realism,External and Internal Politics: India • 223and provided Mahayana with a metaphysical position on scholastic turf tosupplement Madhyamika skepticism. Whereas Asanga was ontologically ambiguous,and primarily concerned with meditation, Vasubandhu I shifted tophilosophical concerns in defending the doctrine that there are no extra-mentalentities (Willis, 1979: 33; Griffiths, 1986: 82–83). A positive doctrine emergedregarding the construction of world appearances. Asanga had described theprocess in meditation whereby one observes the rise and fall of thoughts;tracing them back to their origin, he referred to a store-consciousness. Themetaphor of “seeds” from which experiences grow had been used before, bythe Sautrantikas. With Vasubandhu I’s dynamic idealism, the biological analogycame to represent the fecundity of consciousness, containing the infinitepotentialities which constitute the world. What kept Vijñanavada from becomingan idealism of Absolute Mind in the style of Vedanta or of EuropeanIdealists was its Buddhist commitment; enlightenment comes not with therealization of mind but with its cessation (Wood, 1991).Across the Buddhist attention space there were now a range of positions,from Sarvastivada element realism to Madhyamika dialectical emptiness andYogacara idealism. These completed the period when Buddhist philosophy wascreated by its own internal fractionation.37 Subsequent developments in Buddhistphilosophy, from the 400s through the 700s, were driven by a wideningintellectual struggle against the emerging Hindu philosophies. As the materialbase of Buddhism weakened, its final creativity was to come from a recombinationof positions among Hinayana and Mahayana philosophers.The Buddhist-Hindu WatershedThe greatest creative period of Indian philosophy occurred when Hinduismfirst challenged the Buddhist schools. In Figure 5.4, the generations from about400 to 800 c.e. contain both the first great names of Hindu philosophy andthe greatest outpouring of Buddhist philosophies. In this watershed periodthere is one interlocking network, not two; both sides of the intellectualattention space develop in symbiotic conflict.The material basis for intellectual production is now at its height. Nowexist the great intersectarian monasteries, of which Nalanda is the prototype;here not only are the various sects of Buddhism represented, but Hindu laymenas well. There is a good deal of crossing of the lines. Around 500 c.e. theHindu philosopher Bhartrihari is said to have alternated between monasticdiscipline and lay life, and to have lived in the Nalanda monastery as a layman.Bhartrihari’s teacher was the brother-in-law of one of Vasubandhu II’s pupils(Dutt, 1962: 290; EIP, 1990: 121). In the 600s Gaudapada, Shankara’s reputedgrand-teacher, apparently switched among Mahayana, Samkhya, and Vedanta.224 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsFIGURE 5.4. CONFLICT OF BUDDHIST AND HINDU SCHOOLS,400–900 C.E.External and Internal Politics: India • 225Biographies from this period are full of stories of the philosophers travelingfrom center to center, debating and sometimes converting their rivals. TheBuddhist logician Dignaga defeated a Brahman at Nalanda, and both theemperor Harsha and the regional kings held public disputations among philosophersof all religions (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:33; Dutt, 1962: 266). Hinduphilosophies became prominent in the intellectual world, first by contactingthe Buddhist networks, then by emulating their debates and eventually theirorganizational structure. Since so many of the Buddhist philosophers were alsoBrahmans, we must envision this transition as a shift in the strength of centersof attraction in intellectual space. Dignaga and Dharmakirti (and many othersbefore them, such as Buddhaghosa and Nagarjuna) were Brahmans from thesouth, just as Asanga and Vasubandhu I were Brahmans from the northwest(Eliot, 2:86); when they traveled to the center, it was the great Buddhistphilosophers they sought; and the factional space they opened up created newpositions on the Buddhist side. Later, fewer and fewer of the Brahman educatedclass were making this choice; instead they opened up positions on the Hinduside of the turf. After Shankara, there were Shaiva monks with their ownmonastic headquarters. Eventually all the Hindu sects had their maths, orcenters of learning.The Buddhist monastic centers from about 400 to their last vestiges in the1100s became universities in much the sense of the Christian universities ofEurope in the 1200s. Philosophy had grown up from “theology.” Conditionswere optimal for creative conflict, a few centers of attention with connectingnetworks: Nalanda, above all, the “University of Paris” of its day, known forits “row of monasteries with towers licking the clouds”; an outlier at Valabhiin the west, made eminent by some of Vasubandhu II’s disciples (Dutt, 1962:225–231); on the Hindu side, Mithila,38 very near Nalanda, which became theheadquarters of Nyaya-Vaisheshika; and Varanasi (Banaras) 150 miles upriver,a holy city for both Hindus and Buddhists, a center of intellectual factions inUpanishadic times which became active again during the days of the greatMimansakas and Shankara.Chinese visitors in the 600s described Nalanda as a marvel, with its carvedwalls and mosaic floors, brickwork brushed with vermilion paste and polishedwith oil to shine like mirrors, its balustrades and turrets and tile-covered roofs,its temples where Buddha images were surrounded by jewels and ornamentsof lustrous gold. There were 100 professors and 3,000 students, both monksand laity, with crowds of servants and porters. When learned Nalanda monkswent out, they were carried in sedan chairs surrounded by attendants. Waterclocks kept time for the events of the day, which were announced by drumstrokes and blasts on a conch shell. Books were locked up at mealtimes toprevent stealing. During lessons the monasteries “hummed with teaching and226 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsrecitation.” Nalanda was a center for advanced teaching, and by the 600spupils had to pass an entrance examination, perhaps to keep down theirnumbers. After passing preliminary courses and tests in Mahayana philosophy,students took specialized schools of discussion. Debates before the assemblywere the place where one acquired a reputation, and learned men camefrom around India to advance their careers. In all, there were five such mahaviharauniversities in Bihar and Bengal at the time; the second most famouswas Vikramashila, with 1,000 students (Dutt, 1962: 204, 235, 313, 327,331–348, 360).Cosmopolitanism was also promoted by the appearance of libraries, suchas the one at Nalanda which burned uncontrollably when sacked by theMuslims. We know that at Nalanda not only were the texts of the rivalBuddhist philosophies studied, Hinayana as well as the Mahayana, but alsosecular topics such as logic, medicine, and grammar, and even the Hinduspecialties, the Vedas, magic (Atharvaveda), and Samkhya (Dutt, 1962: 333).On the other side, it was from this time forward that Hindu philosophers wrotecritiques of rival factions, both Hindu and Buddhist. Cultural capital wasexplicitly borrowed; an instance of repeated crossover between the camps isthe work of Shankarasvamin (600s), a Nyaya logician whose commentary onDignaga became the most famous introductory logic text in Buddhist Chinaand Japan (Nakamura, 1980: 300).This society was sophisticated and rather worldly. As we can tell from theclassic Hindu dramas and poetry of the Gupta period (Kalidasa, Bhasa, thenovelist Dandin) and from the lifestyle depicted in the erotic handbook theKamasutra, religion was a taken-for-granted institution of the social world,not necessarily an otherworldly preoccupation, and monks could be spies andgo-betweens for love affairs. The culminating Buddhist philosopher Dharmakirti,whose philosophy limits knowledge to the world of experience, hada rather secular reputation. It is not surprising that the Lokayata, the materialist“heresy” dating from the time of the Buddha, had its last living representativesin Jayarasi and Purandhara, contemporaries of Dharmakirti (Dasgupta,1921–1955: 3:536). The changeover to Hindu intellectual dominancethat followed resembles somewhat a “Protestant” Reformation against a Renaissance-like decadence of Buddhist “Catholicism.”In this period crystallized what later came to be regarded as the orthodoxHindu “six darshanas.” Retrospective ideology traces Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya,Vaisheshika, Mimamsa, and Vedanta back to the early Upanishadic period orbefore. But it is reasonably clear that until around 200–300 c.e. or even later,there were no Hindu philosophical schools as such, holding distinctive territoriesin the intellectual attention space. There was a morass of positions andtendencies, none of which rose clearly above the others, and none defended byExternal and Internal Politics: India • 227an intellectual champion who commanded the respect of followers and rivals.Hindu “philosophy” was in the shade of Buddhist philosophies in this periodbecause its inchoate tendencies considerably exceeded the upper limits of thelaw of small numbers. A proto-Samkhya existed in the form of various conceptswhich were mixed with others in popular works such as the Mahabharata.39 Mimamsa consisted in a number of very specific textual interpretationsof the meanings of words in the Vedas, not as a coherent philosophy atan explicit higher level of abstraction. Badarayana’s Brahma-sutras were justone commentary among others on the grab bag of traditional texts thatconstituted Brahmanical education. The Upanishads had not yet been reducedto a canonical set of 11 or so; in fact more than 100 Upanishads wererecognized, and they continued to be written as late as 1500 c.e. (Nakamura,1973: 77). And within the Upanishads, as we have seen, there were dozens ofphilosophies, none worked out in any depth. All this material so strained thelaw of small numbers that it made no very definite impact on the attentionspace. The creation of Hindu philosophies was a paring down to a smallnumber of positions, and a sharpening into an explicit level of abstraction andsystematization in the battle against Buddhist philosophies. From here date thehigher levels of sophistication in Indian philosophy, comparable to the cumulativegenerations of European intellectual chains.I will treat clumps of Hindu and Buddhist schools together as they mutuallyshaped one another.40The Dialectic of Nyaya, Buddhist Logic, and EpistemologyThe Intersectarian Theory of Argument. The Nyaya-sutras appeared around100 c.e., and reached their mature form sometime around the lifetime of Nagarjunaor shortly after (EIP, 1977: 4). Nyaya is usually translated as “logic,”but its contents are a good deal broader than the Aristotelean and Megarianlogic which dominated in the West. Early Nyaya consisted in classifying modesof knowledge, including a description of the bodily senses, and of the componentsof a debate. Extensively treated are various kinds of invalid debating tacticssuch as sophistries, caviling, and quibbling, all of which gives the impressionthat the sutras arose as a kind of rule book for judges in awarding victoryand defeat.Included is a relatively brief treatment of what looks like a five-step syllogism:(1) to prove there is fire on the mountain; (2) because there is smoke;(3) for example, as in a kitchen; where there is no fire, as in a lake, there isno smoke; (4) the mountain has smoke; (5) therefore there is fire on themountain. The work of argument is packed into steps (2) and (3), called the“reason” and the “example.” The principles which are implicitly or explicitly228 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsinvoked are sometimes a priori, but for the most part they are inductive; andin general the Nyayas emphasized sensory perception as the origin of knowledge.None of the Indian schools distinguished between formal and empiricalvalidity. They always assumed that arguments should be substantively true,unlike the Greeks, with their concern for the validity of inference apart fromits contents. Later logicians, led by the Buddhists, extensively classified themodes of syllogistic argument;41 but Indian logic remained closely tied toarguments for particular epistemologies and ontologies. A concern for puretechnical logic emerged only with the Neo-Nyaya school around 1350.Emerging from the inchoate competition of the Upanishadic sages, Nyayabecame the first real Hindu philosophical school, forming a meta-theory ofargument, useful across the factions. Not surprisingly, this was the first schoolto make contact with the Buddhist side of the field. The Buddhist schools hadhabitually formulated their arguments as ontological assertions; epistemologyseems to have remained implicit or at most uncritical assertion, and formallogic was unknown. At the time Nyaya emerged on the Hindu side, theBuddhists were entering a phase of intensified dispute, as Mahayana took theoffensive and Nagarjuna set out to destroy all rival ontologies. Nagarjuna usedno formal logic, but he was aware of the incipient Nyaya school logic, whichhe attacked (Nakamura, 1980: 238–239, 287). Some of the impetus for formulatingthe full Nyaya-sutras may have been in response to the Madhyamikas.Given that Nagarjuna, like many Buddhists, was a Brahman, it is possiblethat Nyaya and Madhyamika both emerged in the vague borderland of Buddhismand Hinduism, where a common pool of educated intelligentsia sharedearly training by Brahman teachers while often moving on to the betterinstitutionalized and more advanced philosophy in the Buddhist networks.Perhaps for this reason, in discussing the objects of knowledge the Nyaya-sutras(1.1.18–22) sound much like the Buddhist discussion of the chain ofcausation from attachment, aversion and ignorance to worldly pain and transmigration,and finally to release.Buddhist logic developed in symbiosis with the Nyaya school: first asimitation, then as debate. The first explicit Buddhist logical writings weremanuals of debating tactics, including the five-member “syllogism,” producedby the founders of Yogacara: Maitreyanatha, Asanga, and, with a little moreoriginality, the first Vasubandhu (Nakamura, 1980: 294; Dutt, 1962: 265;Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:28–29). Later on the Hinayana side Vasubandhu IIwould incorporate more elaborate logic into the Abhidharma. The first greatindividual name in Nyaya, Vatsyayana, was a contemporary of VasubandhuII and a target of his attacks. In the network (Figure 5.4) we also see aconnection between Vasubandhu II and Bhartrihari, whom Dignaga would inturn both criticize and develop. Dignaga became the great Buddhist logicianExternal and Internal Politics: India • 229by making a wholesale onslaught on the bases of the Nyaya system. From nowon, Dignaga and his successor Dharmakirti were the representative Buddhistsin the eyes of outsiders, targets of attacks by many notable Hindu philosophers,and defended by counterblasts which made up much of the activity of laterBuddhist philosophy.Bhartrihari’s Language Philosophy. Bhartrihari (ca. 500) is emblematic of thenew creative situation that arose with the confluence of Buddhist and Hindunetworks. He weaves together common themes of Buddhism and the increasinglyphilosophical Hinduism, and sets off major new directions in both.Bhartrihari was a grammarian, an old technical specialty among the Brahmanscholars which enjoyed considerable repute across religious camps. Bhartriharimade strong claims to raise the religious and metaphysical importance of hisdiscipline. He is associated with the revival of an Upanishadic cult which heldthat chanting the sacred syllable aum brings contact with Brahman, the essenceof reality. This was a broadening of the most conservative Vedic tradition thatthe correct pronunciation of the hymns is the key to their ritual power. As inso many other instances, a reactionary move set in motion a creative innovation.Bhartrihari participated in Buddhist circles at Nalanda, where one Mahayanafaction was mantra-yana, or tantrism, which also focused on chantingmagic syllables, among which aum was especially honored. Bhartrihari’s cultof language may well have been an attempt to transcend the philosophicaldifferences between Buddhism and Hinduism.42For Bhartrihari, the world is constituted by language. Language itself isdivine, the manifestation of Brahman. The world of multiplicity does not reallyexist; it merely comes from the way in which language is spoken. Bhartrihariuses the old grammatical distinction, going back to Patañjali (ca. 150 b.c.e.),between the meaning of a word and the actual sounds by which it is spoken;the latter vary among speakers, but the former is constant. Bhartrihari generalizesthis to argue that the meaning of a word, which may be ambiguous whenuttered alone, emerges from the context of the sentence as a whole, or fromthe larger passage in which it appears. Bhartrihari uses this theory of languageto support philosophical holism. He goes so far as to argue that the parts oflanguage do not really exist; to split a sentence into words, and these intoroots, suffixes, and so forth, is useful only for analysis, or for teaching someonewho does not yet know how to speak, and is superfluous for those who can(EIP, 1990: 10–11). Bhartrihari’s argument is a counterpart to the Madhyamikaanalysis of the reification of aggregates. An action such as “cooking”takes place over time; the word cooks merely collects these events. Ultimatelyall the distinctions of language are unreal separations within a single whole.Bhartrihari’s sphota, the trans-verbal unit of meaning, is something like a230 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsPlatonic universal; but ultimately meaning goes beyond language and distinction.Only Brahman exists, the distinctionless ultimate. The phenomenal worldappears by making distinctions within Brahman; these are due to Brahman’sprimary manifestation, the power of time, which produces grammatical tensesin language and all the apparent differentiations of experience.Bhartrihari is the hinge around which changes turn on both sides of theintellectual field.43 On the side of Hindu orthodoxy, he repudiated Nyaya-Vaisheshika pluralism, as well as the Mimamsa language philosophy whichgave primacy to individual syllables, and launched arguments for monism andthe doctrine of world illusion that would culminate in the Advaita. On theBuddhist side, Bhartrihari’s younger contemporary at Nalanda was Dignaga(ca. 480–540). Direct network contact was thus likely between the greatest starof medieval Buddhism and the most important early Hindu philosopher. Oftenquoting his predecessor, Dignaga adopted Bhartrihari’s notion that experiencedreality consists in verbal constructions which promote ultimately unreal distinctions,while giving the argument a traditionally Buddhist thrust towardnegation.Dignaga’s Epistemology of Negation. In the debating schools, Dignaga madea stir by reducing the syllogism from five members to three. This looks like asimple elimination of redundancy, but it implies a shift to a higher level ofabstraction, focusing on the logical core and away from the concern withprocedures of debate which characterized the Nyaya. Simultaneously Dignagaeliminated the traditional discussion of quibbles and other tactical fallacies,and expanded the classification of syllogistic argument. The treatiseon logic became a vehicle for developing philosophical positions, displacingthe unwieldy Abhidharma-style compendium. The Buddhist “Nyaya-vadins”amounted to a good deal more than a technical reform in logic; they becamethe most famous school within later Indian Buddhism by their synthesis ofBuddhist doctrines and their attack on the Hindu schools.Dignaga attacked the common epistemology of Nyaya, Vaisheshika, andMimamsa. All these held a realist position, taking raw sensory perception asa basis for valid knowledge. Indeed, the Mimamsakas described perception asthe physical transmission of a beam from the eye to the object, grasping itsform and carrying it back to the observer (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:23). Samkhyaheld that the senses actually become the objects perceived; seeing involvesbecoming the color seen (EIP, 1987: 99).Dignaga reduced the sources of knowledge to two (the lists of the Hinduschools had included as many as six): sensory perception and inference whichfollows from it. Perception is always of particulars; and since experienceconsists only in particulars, it is inutterable, an indexical “thusness.” All wordsExternal and Internal Politics: India • 231are in the realm of post-sensory inference, and they are all universals. As inmuch traditional Buddhist doctrine, universals do not really exist; they aremerely mental, illusory products of consciousness whose overcoming, like allillusions of permanences over and above momentary aggregates, constitutesenlightenment.Dignaga’s most famous theory is that names are negative. A ‘cow’ is merelya ‘not–non-cow’. This might seem to beg the question, as some meaning of‘cow’ is already assumed in the definition. But Dignaga stresses that any namewhatsoever is a universal; it refers to all possible appearances of this thing (thisis true even in the case of proper names, since their objects are a series ofappearances in the flux of experience). To refer to something as ‘white’, onecannot show that one knows all possible instances of ‘white’; all one can dois to demarcate this particular experience from ‘non-white’ (Stcherbatsky,1962: 1:459–460). Pure sensation is all that exists, and that is always particular,and wordless. Verbal thought makes it definite by negation, differentiatingconcepts vis-à-vis one another.44 Negation is the defining characteristic ofthought; and since negation itself is not to be reified, thought is ultimately anillusion. It is valid only on the plane of ordinary human experience in samsara.On the higher plane, reached in the illumination of meditation, one perceivesthings as they really are, a world of evanescent particulars.45Dignaga disposes of the Vaisheshika reified ontology, and of Hindu theoriesof language, both the Mimamsa with its verbal reports and eternal sounds,and Bhartrihari’s primacy of the verbal sentence. Dignaga’s philosophy emergesin dialectical opposition to these positions, but it also continues and buildson a main premise accepted throughout the Hindu schools of the time: thereality of sensory perception and the building of mental inference upon it.Dignaga radicalizes these concepts by interpreting them through the traditionalBuddhist doctrines of momentariness and nominalism, upheld in his day bythe Sautrantika school. The response of the Nyayas is equally dialectical.Nyaya-Vaisheshika seems to have become a united front at this time; undercommon attack by the Buddhists, Naiyayikas led by Uddyotakara (ca. 550–600) put forward a common defense. Their response to the Buddhist negativityand illusoriness of concepts was to become even more realist. The Buddhists,constructing the mundane world out of negation, denied that negation is areality; the Naiyayikas added non-existence as a seventh category to the traditionalVaisheshika six (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 25, 1:48–49). The Naiyayikasmultiplied the number of entities which they regarded as real: relations arereal; relations among relations are real as well. These issues became the puzzlecontents which would link Buddhist and Hindu philosophers for several centuries.The Naiyayikas urged that existence itself must exist; the Buddhistsdenied it, holding that existence is inexpressible reality itself.232 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsIn the 600s, readjustments in the Nyaya and Mimamsa schools werebringing about developments which would culminate in the turning point ofHindu philosophy, the Advaita revolution. But first we must retrace our stepsto examine a second dimension of Hindu-Buddhist interaction, on the ontologicalside.Rival Element CosmologiesLet us go back to the centuries following the rise of Buddhism. The majorUpanishads as late as 200 c.e. describe a tremendous diversity of positionsamong the Brahman intellectuals engaged in continuing debates. We see a greatmany individual sages, none of whose substantive position received sufficientfocus to achieve lasting fame. The problem of intellectual success is to find adistinctive position vis-à-vis one’s rivals; the Brahman philosophers of thisperiod fail to stand out from the morass of crosscutting positions. The firstmovement to appropriate a clearly delineated slice of the turf was the Nyaya,with its textbook of debating tactics. But the Nyaya philosophers were simultaneouslyparticipants in substantive debates about ontological issues; theNyaya sutras had their own position on the elements which constitute theuniverse, and in this respect they overlapped with other philosophers, especiallythose of the Vaisheshika school, which was also solidifying out of the morassof Upanishadic positions. A third position which gradually crystallized anidentity around this time was the Samkhya. These positions eventually becamemore distinctive, and more famous, as they carved up the field in oppositionto one another, the pluralist realism of Nyaya and Vaisheshika against theParmenidean tendencies which came to the fore in Samkhya.All this took place on the Hindu side of the field, among the religiouslyorthodox Brahmans; the real intellectual dominants of the time were theBuddhists, and it was Buddhist ontology and soteriology which set the stylefor the emerging Hindu philosophies. There is a striking parallel betweenAbhidharma scholasticism developed ca. 300 b.c.e., and the regroupings oflater Upanishadic philosophies in the Nyaya, Vaisheshika, and Samkhya. Allthese positions are element philosophies; they enumerate the contents of thecosmos, albeit with rival lists, and with increasingly distinctive and explicitontological assumptions. And all these positions progressively lengthened andsystematized their lists in what looks like imitation of one another. In some ofthe Upanishads, especially the earliest ones, there was a tendency to look fora single, ultimate constituent of the universe, but these monist strains wereovertaken by the scholasticizing tendency, as if in competition over the mostcomprehensive list of all the things that various philosophers had mentionedas constituents of the world.External and Internal Politics: India • 233Vaisheshika Realism of Plural Substances. The Vaisheshika-sutras appearedsometime around 100 c.e.; their roots were earlier, but their “orthodox”interpretation as a coherent school occurred around 500 c.e. with Prashastapada.The emergence of a distinctive position has been reconstructed as traversingthe following phases: (1) an enumerative philosophy of nature; (2) atheory of atoms in a mechanistic universe; (3) a more abstract doctrine ofontological categories, arising from the effort to combine and coordinatevarious lists of elements; (4) finally, the reorganization of the old philosophyof nature under six categories, perhaps by Prashastapada himself (Frauwallner,1953–56; Halbfass, 1992: 75–78). In the older layer of the Vaisheshika-sutra,there seem to be only three categories: substances, qualities, and motions. Tothis physical depiction of the universe were later added three more categories:universals (or genus), particulars (species or universals of smaller scope), andthe relation of inherence. Presumably these latter categories arose in debatesover the nature of relationships among the earlier categories; inherence seemsto have been added to explain the relation between substances and theirattributes, or between substances and their universal genus. Under these categoriesare arranged further lists, such as 24 or so qualities, a style of arrangementbearing an unmistakable similarity to the Buddhist Abhidharma.A field of intellectual attention is constituted by a topic and a style ofargument. The field then divides into oppositions by substantive distinctionswithin that space. Early Vaisheshika reified the qualities, and provoked Buddhistand Jaina criticism as to how a substrate of bare, quality-less substancescould be the locus for certain qualities or universals rather than any others(Halbfass, 1992: 94–99). Prashastapada attempted to evade the difficulties byredefining substance as per se a possessor of attributes. His move did not cutoff subsequent critiques, but it opened new turf by separating the cosmologicalfrom the logical dimensions of concepts. Prashastapada’s commentary overshadowedthe original Vaisheshika-sutras, and became the main vehicle forlater commentaries which made up the lineage of the school. Vaisheshikaremained vulnerable to further attack, but by the same token it guaranteed itsprominence in the intellectual field by staking out an ultra-realist position, andexpanding it to meet a succession of opponents.Samkhya Dualism. A rival category philosophy was elaborated as Samkhya,a name which means enumeration or categorization.46 Samkhya as a philosophicalposition formed during the Upanishadic period as a grab bag ofheterogeneous concepts, part abstractions, part mythological personifications.It gradually crystallized as a dualism of Prakriti and Purusha, the two worldsubstances, roughly matter and spirit, reminiscent of the mythology of worldproduction from the copulation of god and goddess.47 Over many generations234 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsan identifiable intellectual faction emerged specializing in this kind of enumeration,apparently going through a number of rival versions. The Samkhyamentioned in the Gita and elsewhere in the Mahabharata, and that was knownto Buddhists around 100 c.e., had not yet settled on a clear dualism. Emphasiswas still placed on a single overriding peak principle. There were eight Prakritisinstead of a monistic material substance; the list of categories which make upthe world was not as elaborate as it was to become later (EIP, 1987: 121–122).This vague proto-Samkhya turned into a conscious philosophical system, perhapsat the hands of Pañchashikha ca. 200 c.e., and definitely with Varshaganya(early 300s) and Vindhyavasin, whom we find debating with the Buddhistsin Vasubandhu’s circle. Around 400 Ishvarakrishna produced a versionof Samkhya which became canonical, sharpening up philosophical issues apparentlyin response to Buddhist and Vaisheshika criticism. By the next generationrival versions of Samkhya, such as Madhava’s, are referred to as“heretical” and are lost in the subsequent attention space (EIP, 1987: 148).The unique feature of the mature Samkhya philosophical system was thatit rigidly separated the realm of Purusha from the material world; spirit merelylooks on as a witness consciousness, illuminating without interfering in thedifferentiated realm at all. Prakriti was regarded as the source from whichemanated the entire phenomenal world, including even the discriminatingintellect, ego, and mind—thereby giving this part of the Samkhya system arather materialist and reductionist slant.As Samkhya took shape in the philosophical attention space, its metaphoricalimagery became subject to critique. Buddhists ridiculed the tension betweenits monist and pluralist tendencies (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:18). Purusha issupposed to be a pure unchanging light of consciousness, witnessing theunfolding of Prakriti without interfering with it; but how can the connectionbetween these two substances be explained? On the side of Purusha, how canone hold that it consists in an undifferentiated substance and yet is dividedinto a plurality of individual souls? On the side of Prakriti, how explain whymatter starts evolving in the first place and why it eventually comes to rest?The problem is exacerbated because Samkhya builds on the ontological argumentsof a Parmenidean immutability and self-containedness of being. Alreadyin the Gita (2.16) the argument was advanced, “Of the non-existent there isno coming to be; of the existent there is no ceasing to be”; and the full-fledgedSamkhya philosopher Varshaganya held, “There is no origination for what isnot, nor destruction for what is” (Halbfass, 1992: 59). The inconsistency ofthis stance with a dynamic universe, and with relations among a plurality ofsubstances and modes, provided a fertile field for critique. During these battlesSamkhya rose to prominence in the attention space.Samkhya became the core philosophy of popular Hinduism by rationalizingExternal and Internal Politics: India • 235its mythological heritage. One of the ingredients it took over (found in contemporaryMahayana as well) was the periodic creation and destruction of theworld through an endless round of kalpas, world epochs. In the rationalizedversion, Samkhya reconciled this with its Parmenidean substance stasis byelaborating the concepts of potentiality and latency. Prakriti is always the same;it merely emanates or withdraws the world of actuality like a tortoise protrudingand retracting its legs (Halbfass, 1992: 56–61). Potentiality (shakti) nowbecomes the next philosophical battleground. Vaisheshika took the oppositestance from Samkhya, positing a pluralism of entities with maximal distinctivenessacross time; there is no latency, but continuously new combinationswhich make up new realities, wholes which have existence over and abovetheir parts. A later Vaisheshika philosopher, Udayana (ca. 1000), went so faras to argue that a tree that has a small part cut from it becomes a totally newtree (Halbfass, 1992: 94).Potentiality and Ontological Pluralism. The Samkhya-Vaisheshika debategave prominence to an issue that reverberated through monist-pluralist lineupsof Indian philosophy for over a millennium. In the orthodox formulation byIshvarakrishna, Samkhya held the position of satkaryavada: the effect preexistswithin its material cause. Vaisheshika upheld asatkaryavada, denying thatdistinctive entities could be so connected, since this would reduce one substanceto another. Here again the Hindu philosophers were elaborating a conflictwhich had emerged among the Buddhists. Already in the early Abhidharmaperiod, Buddhist factions had argued about the causality of dependent origination:Sarvastivadins held that past, present, and future all exist in their ownright as momentary point-instants of space-time; the Kashyapiyas had arguedfor existences across time in the form of effects which are inherent in an earlierexistent. Nearer the era of the Samkhya-Vaisheshika disputes, the Madhyamikaseliminated entirely the reality of time as well as of any substance in whichcausality could inhere; the opposite stance was taken by Yogacara, whosestorehouse consciousness containing the seeds of all experience implies anunlimited scope for preexisting potentialities.Samkhya and Vaisheshika reproduced a Buddhist problem space on theHindu side of the board, but they maintained their distinctive non-Buddhistidentities by making different combinations out of the common stock ofphilosophical ingredients. Samkhya shared the Buddhist dislike for reifyingqualities, as well as the Buddhist sense of the illusoriness of manifested worldappearance, but differed by positing an unchanging substance beneath it all—infact, two of them. Vaisheshika resembled the Buddhist doctrine of ever-changingaggregates assembling and reassembling across time, but maintained itsdistinctiveness by accepting the reality of all manner of physical and meta-236 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsphysical entities. Samkhya and Vaisheshika were almost reciprocal images ofeach other in their relations to Buddhist doctrines. On the other side, laterNyaya-Vaisheshikas (Shridhara ca. 900s, Udayana ca. 1000) took over theconcept of potentiality (Halbfass, 1992: 57–58). By then Samkhya had fadedand no longer counted as a rival, and the Vaisheshikas’ concern was to givetheir position maximal opposition to Buddhist momentariness. In characteristicVaisheshika fashion, they did so by reifying potentiality and adding it to the listof elements which constitute the universe. This comprised Nyaya-Vaisheshikaturf: every dispute led to expanding the categories of their realist system.Samkhya, like the Yoga which became textually associated with it, hadgreater influence in popular Hindu culture than among philosophical circles;its greatest appeal was the mythological residue in its concepts and metaphors.48 On the technical side, Samkhya’s ungainly and memory-taxing enumerativelists overlapped too much with similar classificatory systems ofNyaya-Vaisheshika and several Buddhist positions. Greater prominence in theintellectual field went to newer systems which pushed forward a few basicunifying principles on a higher level of abstraction. The Advaita revolutiondisplaced Samkhya from the lineup of active positions, borrowing its argumentsfor satkarya and its terminology, while eliminating the embarrassmentof its dualist inconsistencies and transferring its Parmenidean stance to a purermonism. Hereafter there are occasional Samkhya commentators, but they seemremote and uncertain about the original system. After ca. 600–700, Samkhyano longer responds to external critiques as a living philosophy; it has becomean inert record (EIP, 1987: 16, 29–30, 45).The Ontology of Evanescent Point-Instants. On the Buddhist side, the effectsof the Samkhya challenge are seen in Vasubandhu II. Why did the greatestcreativity of the Hinayana schools occur much later than the greatest Mahayanaphilosophies, the Madhyamika in the 100s c.e. and the Yogacara idealismin the 300s? Nagarjuna had explicitly critiqued both Sarvastivadin essencerealism and Sautrantika nominalism; Madhyamika had good claim to expressthe detachment from philosophy and the attainment of nirvana that was thehallmark of original Buddhism. Nevertheless, Vasubandhu II (ca. 400–480) puttogether the ingredients for a powerful intellectual comeback on the Hinayanaside. It was his network, more than that of the Madhyamikas or Yogacaras,which produced the greatest creativity; the ontology of evanescent point-instantsexpounded by the great logicians Dignaga and Dharmakirti was a developmentof Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmist metaphysics.I would reconstruct the dynamics of the situation as follows. The Hindusmade their attack by moving into the central attention space occupied by theBuddhist schools. There, although the Mahayanists had been the creativeExternal and Internal Politics: India • 237movements in recent centuries, the conservative “Hinayana” sects were stillinstitutionally most numerous. So when Hindu philosophers such as Vindhyavasin,Ishvarakrishna, Vatsyayana, and Bhartrihari made their moves, theschools they were most likely to encounter were the Sautrantikas and Sarvastivadins.Vasubandhu II, who was the Buddhist point of contact in the challengeof Nyaya and the grammarians, was also at the center of this additional lineof network contact with Hindu philosophers. Vindhyavasin (68 in Figure 5.4),a leader in the mature formation of philosophical Samkhya, defeated a SautrantikaBuddhist (67) in debate, who turned out to be the teacher of VasubandhuII; Vasubandhu is said later to have defeated Vindhyavasin in return (EIP,1987: 11–12, 135). Sautrantika extreme nominalism had been shown up bythe substance philosophy of Samkhya. Vasubandhu became a famous name byanswering the provocation to his teacher.Vasubandhu’s answering move was to update the Abhidharma substancephilosophy of the Sarvastivadins, with all its prestige as the long-standingphilosophical “basket” of Buddhist scripture, by making many amendmentsin the direction of the Sautrantika school in which he was trained. Vasubandhuraised the level of abstraction, reinterpreting the older scholastic list of heterogeneouscategories, all of which had been given reality as elements of the worldconstruction. The melding between essentialism and nominalism was carriedout by defining some elements as point-instants, others as conceptual. Substanceswere believed identical with flashes of causal energy in time; but nowthey were distinguished from “non-forceful” elements, which escape the chainof karmic causation by occupying an epistemological realm of knowledgerather than the ontological plane of being (Potter, 1976: 130–137; Nakamura,1980; Dutt, 1962: 291). That this epistemologization was a countermoveagainst the Hindus is suggested from critiques directed by Vasubandhu’s Sarvastivadinpupil Gunamati (73 in Figure 5.4) against the Samkhyas, Vaisheshikas,and Jainas, some of them in personal debate. Henceforward Vasubandhu’sAbhidharmakosha would become the classic statement of the already 800-yearoldAbhidharma tradition.Now we have a rearrangement on the Buddhist side of the field. The oldrivals Sautrantika and Sarvastivada become a united front, though some of thesparks that fly from the merger are struck by efforts of more traditionalistSarvastivadins (such as Sanghabhadra in Kashmir) to combat it. The Mahayanatide is checked; some of its members convert to Sarvastivada and attackMahayana (e.g., Guñaprabha; Dutt, 1962: 292). Others use Vasubandhu’s newammunition to incorporate Yogacara. The old element realism and the pureidealism are brought together by later generational links such as Sthiramati.Dharmapala, in the main line of masters at Nalanda, tries on behalf of the238 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsMahayana camp to incorporate the prestige of Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakoshaby interpreting it through the lens of Yogacara idealism. It is this lineagewhich the Chinese pilgrim Hsuan-tsang encounters in the 630s, and bringsback to China as the hyper-sophisticated Yogacara system called Fa-hsiang.Dharmakirti’s Synthesis. The greatest intellectual success from this flow ofenergy in the Buddhist camp where all the networks ran together at Nalandawas Dharmakirti (ca. 650). He met the challenges both against Buddhism andwithin it by purifying and synthesizing its major philosophical doctrines.Against the conservative Madhyamika attack on the new logic, Dharmakirtiset out to extend and vindicate the logical innovations of Dignaga, while usingthem as a frame into which to pour his own substantive philosophy. Thatphilosophy was essentially the old Sarvastivada-Sautrantika ontology of pointinstants,stripped from its casing of memory-taxing classifications that makesAbhidharma scholasticism so tedious. Dharmakirti drove out the last vestigesof a realist tone, reducing every element to unreality. He ensured that Buddhistaggregation doctrine would stand at the extreme opposite from the realists ofthe Hindu camp, and in this respect Dharmakirti moved toward the Yogacarins.His most creative stroke was to use Madhyamika tools to transcendboth realism and idealism.Everything hinges on the meaning of being, existence, or reality, whichDharmakirti treats as interchangeable terms. Reality is that which is causallyefficacious. A real fire is that which burns: an action, not an entity. The realis that which causes something, and therefore that which is changing. There isnothing but the chain of dependent origination—the classic doctrine of theBuddha, which Nagarjuna had used in demonstrating that nothing has anessence of its own. This flow of change cannot be broken into ultimateelements, little static bits with change connecting them; there is nothing butcausality itself (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:85–91; Halbfass, 1992: 165). Our conceptionsof entities are not reality but mental constructs, differentiations imposedby the mind, according with Dignaga’s doctrine of the negativity ofdistinctions.Abhidharma scholasticism had included time and space as real elements ofthe universe; in fact Sarvastivada tended to identify empty space or ether withnirvana as the object of meditation (Conze, 1962: 164–165). Yogacara idealism,breaking with this heterogeneous omni-realism, had denied the reality ofany external world, including space and time. Dharmakirti applied his criterion:since the real is that which is causal, time and space are unreal constructs,without efficacy apart from the “thusness” of immediate point-instants. Dharmakirtifurther subjected time and space to dialectical dissolution, somethingExternal and Internal Politics: India • 239like Leibniz’s criticism of “the labyrinth of the continuum”; one cannot saythat there is an enduring, extended “thing” which comes in and out of existence,nor does it make causal hops between rests. Extension and duration, likeall concepts, are merely distinctions imposed by the mind. Dharmakirti gaveBuddhism an aspect of both idealism and realism. The world really exists, itis not merely mind; but the ordinary world of distinct and enduring objects ismentally constructed, not the inutterable “thus-ness” of reality. Because ofDharmakirti’s skill as a synthesizer, subsequent commentators and historiansof Buddhist philosophy classified him in many different camps.Dharmakirti synthesized Buddhism in a form which maximally opposedthe dominant positions in Hindu philosophy up to this time: the pre-Advaitaperiod when Hindus held the realist side of the field.49 Against Uddyotakara’sNyaya criticism as to whether causal efficacy is itself real, the Buddhist repliesthat reality is not a stable quality that is added on; to be real is only to becausally efficacious, and it is superfluous to add that causal efficacy is causallyefficacious. In the same way, it is no conundrum to say that non-existence doesnot exist; it is only a name, “a flower in the sky” (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:90).There is no alternation between reals and moments of producing the next real;one cannot say momentariness has any duration in reality. This has meaningonly in the realm of mental inference.Dharmakirti’s synthesis is the apex of Buddhist philosophy, at the momentwhen it was institutionally fading. Nalanda was still bustling, buoyed bycosmopolitan incursions of Brahmans and lay students, but the weeds weregrowing around the deserted stupas not just in the south but in northern Indiaas well. Dharmakirti is the last flaming of the torch before it blows out, theowl of Minerva taking wing at dusk: the creativity of synthesis as a fadinginstitutional base goes on the defensive. Dharmakirti himself was a lay Buddhist,not a devout monk, and his personal tone sounds like secular ambitionrather than a quest for salvation. The closing stanza of his great work lamentsthe dearth of capable intellectuals to follow his philosophy: “My work willfind no one in this world who would easily grasp its deep sayings. It will beabsorbed and perish in my own person, just as a river in the ocean.” A Tibetanhistorian says that when he finished the work, his pupils showed no appreciation,and his enemies “tied up the leaves [of the palm-leaf manuscript] to thetail of a dog and let him run through the streets where the leaves becamescattered” (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:35–36). In fact, Dharmakirti did end updominating the leading philosophers of the last generations of Indian Buddhism.But his pessimism was prescient. Leaving Nalanda, he retired to hishome in the south, where he founded a monastery. The next successful Brahmanstudent from the south was to be Shankara, and when he came north, itwould be to plunder the carcass of a dying Buddhism.240 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThe Double Revolution in Hindu Philosophy:Mimamsa Ultra-realism and Vedanta Non-dualismAt the turn of the 700s, Hindu philosophy moves into the center of intellectualspace. Until this time the Buddhists have been dominant, and their innovationsgenerate the responses of imitation and counterattack. Hereafter Hinduismacquires that space, and the dynamics of creativity become the splitsand adjustments among Hindu schools. Two major new positions emerge onthe Hindu side—Mimamsa realism and non-dualist Advaita Vedanta. Theseare genuinely new philosophies, though both claim ancient links; they emergein the process of creating the Veda-centered ideology which is the definingmark of “Hinduism.” They establish a new standard of sophistication inHindu philosophy, upstaging Samkhya as amateurish, and pushing Nyaya-Vaisheshika to a new level of argument to regain its stature.The emergence of philosophical Mimamsa and Advaita constitutes a rearrangementof networks. During its period of dominance, one of Buddhism’sadvantages had been that its organizations focused the center of intellectualattention, above all in the northern heartlands of the major empires. Hindudomination in the south had few intellectual consequences, insofar as thesewere the “provinces,” away from the high-prestige cultural centers, too scatteredto focus attention. The initial upsurge of Hinduism in abstract philosophy(not popular literature and religion, which developed centuries earlier) comeswhen leading Hindus make direct contact with the Buddhist networks.In the generations around 700, the Hindu invasion of Buddhist territoriesis especially visible. Gaudapada, the supposed grand-teacher of Shankara, isin northern Bengal, a longtime Buddhist stronghold. Kumarila, who sets offthe new Mimamsa with his rival Prabhakara, is located in the central Ganges,perhaps at Allahabad; his pupils supposedly include Mandana Mishra, who isreputedly delegated by his aged master to debate Shankara.50 Into this networkcomes Shankara, a youth from south India, moving to the center to study atthe holy city Varanasi and debate the Buddhists in their own monasteries; heleaves a lineage of famous pupils after him. Visible in the network for the firsttime are clusters of major Hindu philosophers matching those which Buddhismdisplayed for centuries, repeating the world pattern in which the most influentialthinkers tend to appear in personally connected groups. From now on untilthe rise of Vaishnavism in the south about 1100, insofar as we can tracelocations, much of the intellectual action of Hindu philosophies is in the olderBuddhist strongholds. In the 800s and 900s, the great Nyaya-Vaisheshikaphilosophers are in Kashmir, the old Sarvastivadin territory; at the same timecomes the upsurge of Kashmir Shaivism and Shaktism. Mithila, in Bihar, hasbecome the center for Hindu philosophy, challenging nearby Nalanda. Man-External and Internal Politics: India • 241dana Mishra is there in the days of the Mimamsa-Advaita revolutions in the700s; the great syncretizer Vacaspati Mishra is there in the 900s; and from the900s down into the 1300s it is the base for most of the leading Nyaya-Vaisheshikas. Neo-Nyaya grows up there before migrating farther downriverinto Bengal.The founding generations of the new Mimamsakas and Advaitins interlockwith the Buddhists. Gaudapada is reputedly a converted Mahayanist; by someindications he also wrote a Samkhya commentary before becoming an AdvaitaVedantist (EIP, 1981: 104; EIP, 1987: 209–210). In other words, Gaudapadatraversed both the leading old Hindu philosophy, Samkhya, and the wing ofthe Buddhist world which was being challenged by Vasubandhu’s followers—Madhyamika anti-conceptualism. He (or a series of authors who assembled atext under this name) adumbrates a new space on the Hindu side, an anti-conceptualismwhich claims orthodox roots in the Upanishads.51 Intellectual revolutionstake place by simultaneously rearranging opposing sides of conceptualspace, and the move to Advaita goes along with the development of the mostextreme realism in Indian philosophy, by the Mimamsakas Kumarila andPrabhakara.Shankara brings together both these chains. Picking, choosing, and rearranging,he splits Mimamsa from within. We thus have double revolutions inrapid succession: the “Mimamsa revolution,” which rises above Vedic exegesisto a realism which multiplies ontological entities to an extreme degree; and a“revolution within the Mimamsa revolution,” in which Advaita explicitlyrejects realism. Once again it is creativity by negation, a movement in rapidsuccession to opposing extremes. For all its attacks on Buddhism, early Advaitais taking over Buddhist conceptual space. Prior to 600 or 700, the prominentHindu philosophies (Samkhya, Vaisheshika, the various naive theisms) wereon the pluralist and materialist side of the field; it was the Mahayana Buddhistswho occupied the wing of the field comprising monism, idealism, and illusionism.We see here the result of a long-term shift in the philosophical center ofgravity within Buddhism. During its centuries of institutional dominance, theclassic Hinayana philosophies were on the realist side, led by the Sarvastivadinpluralism of evanescent world elements. A shift begins as Abhidharma realismis challenged, but not displaced, by Madhyamika and Yogacara. The turningpoint is when Buddhism starts to cede the turf of realist element cosmologies.Already in the early generations of Hindu attack, the Buddhists respond bydistancing themselves from the realism represented by Samkhya and Nyaya-Vaisheshika. Vasubandhu II’s revision of Abhidharma, and its anti-conceptualdevelopment by Dignaga and Dharmakirti, move the pluralist branch closer tothe position which regards the ordinary world as illusory. The climax ofBuddhist philosophy, as is so often the case, is the creativity of realignmentduring a grand intellectual retreat.242 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsGaudapada, Mandana, and Shankara now invade the monist side, and theydo so with Buddhist conceptual tools, apparently acquired by direct contactwith the Buddhist camp. Institutionally dying, Buddhism falls open for scavengingby its enemies. Both its sophisticated dialectic and its distinctive ontologyprovide the basis for its successors on the Hindu side of the field.Mimamsa as Reactionary Radicalism. Let us consider first the Mimamsarevolution, then the Advaita hyper-revolution. Mimamsa began as a narrowtechnical specialty of exegesis of the old Vedas, discussing doubtful points(mimamsante) in the performance of sacrifices; it continued the activity of thosewho had composed the Brahmanas, and scorned the abstract discussions ofthe Upanishadic intellectuals (Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 1:157–161, 188). TheMimamsakas acquired a philosophical identity as their opposition to otherBrahmanical schools became more acute. They held the most conservative side,claiming that the Brahman’s role was purely that of professional ritualist.Nevertheless, as they were drawn into the intellectual discussion space, defenseof their externally conservative stance drove Mimamsa into internally quiteradical innovations. It is a common dialectic of intellectual history; we see itagain in the socially reactionary but intellectually radical Neo-Confucians ofSung China, the innovative “Ancient Learning” and “National Learning”schools of Tokugawa Japan, and the anti-Enlightenment and anti-positivistphilosophers of modern Europe. In the case of India, we have proof that aself-conscious ideology favoring innovation is not necessary for creativity;adulation of an allegedly eternal tradition can be creative, since tradition itselfis always interpreted by the present. Constituted as part of a field of forces, asthe oppositions change, conservatives cannot but change as well.The early Mimamsakas developed the self-promoting ideology that the oldVedas were the final authority; to bolster it, they theorized that the soundswhich make up the text are eternal. In reaction to theistic worship in non-sacrificialand non-Brahman cults, the Mimamsakas became strident atheists.Shabara, the first commentator on the Mimamsa sutras (ca. 200 c.e., contemporarywith the crystallization of Hindu law and the other philosophicalschools), argued that gods are mere names, mantra sounds made in rituals(Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 1:206). By the time of Kumarila, the argument wasexpanded to deny that God created the world, since the world is eternal, anda transcendent, undifferentiated God would have no motive for creating anything,let alone a world of imperfections and miseries; and to deny the valueof salvation, since this could consist in nothing but a stone-like unconsciousnesswithout enjoyment (Raju, 1985: 58–61). Furthermore, the purpose ofreligious sacrifices is to bring worldly wealth and pleasure; ethical behavior isno substitute for this way of accumulating a store of merits.The early Mimamsaka “Jaimini” (possibly mythical, between 200 b.c.e.External and Internal Politics: India • 243and 200 c.e.), a conservative Brahman rejecting the new theisms, had held thatrewards are not given by the gods but accrue from the acts of sacrifice themselves(Clooney, 1990). Such arguments raised the question of how the ritualscould bring about future consequences, especially when opposing schoolsdeveloped theories of causality. How can causality take place if there is a timeinterval between cause and result? The Mimamsakas, defending a primitivemagic conception of rituals against the implicit idealism of symbolic or moralinterpretations, were driven onto the philosophical field in a realist position.Implicitly they took up the stance of asatkaryavada, shared by Buddhists andNyaya-Vaisheshika (in opposition to Samkhya), that effects are separate from,not inherent in, their causes.52 Kumarila therefore postulated a soul substanceonto which karmic potentialities accumulated as qualities.Drawn into philosophical debates, the Mimamsakas developed an elaborateepistemology and ontology. Here again we see debates over substantive andontological issues giving rise to a meta-level of epistemology; treated at first asa neutral, common property across the factions, in the next step it becomes aturf for further intellectual divisions in their own right. The early Nyayacommentator Vatsyayana (400s c.e.) gave as example of the syllogism a proofthat a sound is not eternal, denying the central Mimamsa doctrine. In defense,the Mimamsakas of Prabhakara and Kumarila’s generation adopted the Nyayaepistemology, while expanding it to provide tools for their own purposes. TheNyaya and the Samkhya had accepted three or four pramanas, valid methodsof reasoning: perception, inference via the “syllogism,” verbal testimony, andin the case of the Nyaya comparison. Kumarila added two more: negation andpostulation. The latter meant postulating unseen entities to cover a gap in whatwas actually perceived; a prime example was the stored potency of karmicaction which connects the sacrifice with its fruits.Having embarked on the path of multiplying metaphysical entities, theMimamsakas pushed pluralism to an extreme. The Mimamsa systematizersPrabhakara, Kumarila, and Mandana adopted their own versions of scholasticcategory lists, overlapping with many of the standard categories of theirSamkhya and Nyaya-Vaisheshika counterparts. Kumarila’s list has 13 substances,14 qualities, 5 types of action, 2 kinds of universal (Raju, 1985:59–60). Similarity is reified as a substance, since it is qualified by being greateror lesser.Kumarila knew the Madhyamika and Yogacara texts well, and was playinghere on Buddhist conceptual turf, especially the central role of negation inDignaga and Dharmakirti’s logic (Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 1:62). The majorMimamsa philosophers emerged in the generation just after Dharmakirti andappropriated this new intellectual resource for their own purposes. At thecosmopolitan Nalanda “university,” Bhartrihari, Dignaga, and Dharmakirtihad worked on the central ontological problem, the conceptual contradictions244 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathswithin monism and pluralism, and developed a refined theory of negation asthe key to resolving them. Prabhakara and Kumarila shaped their systems indifferent directions over the question of how to incorporate this new material.Kumarila’s most radical tendency was to build categories of negation, takenas real entities. Darkness, he said, is not the mere absence of light, but asubstance with its own qualities of thickness and thinness. Negation not onlyis real but also comprises four of the eight fundamental categories of existence:prior negation (the absence of an object before it is born), posterior negation(the absence of an object after it is destroyed), absolute or infinite negation(the absence of an object in all times and places except where it happens tobe), and mutual negation (the exclusion of two existing things from each other).Prabhakara took the radically opposite stance from Kumarila: negationdoes not exist; reality is always positive, and the forms of negation are merelystatements of inference. Here Prabhakara seems to be borrowing Dignaga’sdoctrine that negation is purely conceptual, while attempting to avoid Dignaga’scorollary that the world is a positive existent without distinctions, whichPrabhakara as a pluralist realist could not accept (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:480).He attempted to control the damage by arguing that there is no negation ingeneral, no non-being as a negation of nothing in particular; all negation is ofa definite and positive object, and being is all that exists. Kumarila, by contrast,implicitly responded to the Bhartrihari-Dignaga-Dharmakirti doctrine that ifnegation is purely nominal and illusory, then objective reality must be undifferentiated.For Kumarila, the pluralism of real entities must be defended, andthat calls for the reality of negation—indeed, a whole array of negations toaccount for differences in time as well as among contemporaneous objects.Debate over Knowledge and Illusion. Predictably, Prabhakara and Kumarilaalso split over epistemology (Raju, 1985: 50–56; Potter, 1976: 197–212). Bothadopt a viewpoint that is close to the Buddhist: everything that is known, isknown through one’s consciousness. Since there is no criterion of the validityof knowledge outside of consciousness, Prabhakara draws the conclusion thatknowledge is valid in itself. False judgments arise not because of consciousperception but because of the intrusion of other factors, such as physicalinterference with one’s eyes, or memories and inferences superadded to theperception. When one mistakes a rope lying on the jungle path for a snake,the simple perceptual judgment is nevertheless true. The object exists andcauses the perception. There is no way to falsify a simple judgment; if it isfalsified by a second perception (looking more closely at the rope), this provesthat the first judgment was not itself simple. Subsequent cognitions do notprove that a first cognition is true; they can only confirm that it was a simplecognition. The truthfulness of the cognition can be given only by itself.Prabhakara defends an extreme realism against any Buddhist-like episte-External and Internal Politics: India • 245mology of world illusion. Kumarila, however, works via the path of negation:errors arise by the imposition of non-presences (memories) upon the present.Since Kumarila takes particular negations as real entities, there continues tobe perception of the real, even in the case of error. These arguments reworkBuddhist concepts in the interest of defending realism against Buddhist worldillusion, and are part of the matrix from which Advaita emerged.53 Prabhakara’semphasis on consciousness as the self-valid starting point of allknowledge is reminiscent of Yogacara, and it points the way to a foundationaluse of the cogito by Shankara and Mandana to establish the reality of theuniversal atman.As a pluralist realist, Prabhakara derives knowledge of the “I” from theperception of objects. Three things are known simultaneously and inseparablyin each cognition: the subject who knows the object, the object known, andthe knowledge of the object. The “I,” however, cannot be known as an objectfor itself, because a subject is never an object. Kumarila debates this point,arguing that the three entities are not revealed simultaneously, and that knowledgeof the “I” emerges by inference. Shankara made these points of disagreementinto a launching pad for his own radical turn from pluralist realism intotranscendental non-dualism.54As a powerful Advaita school emerged in the next generation, Mimamsaestablished its hyper-realism on the opposing front. But the contending versionsof Mimamsa could not all survive in the available attention space. The slotwent to the followers of Kumarila Bhatta, while Prabhakara’s branch soonfaded, his own texts were lost, and Mandana, the third contender, convertedfrom Mimamsa to Advaita. Prabhakara’s weakness was that he was both lessextreme in his realism than Kumarila (especially on pluralism and negation),and in some respects too close to Buddhism. The decisive split may well havebeen over a matter which set the boundaries of Hindu orthodoxy againstheterodox religions: the caste system (Halbfass, 1991: 367–378). Kumarilaargued that castes are eternally fixed because they are real universals (somethinglike ‘natural kinds’). Performance of the sacrifices is the only way toaccumulate merits, but only a Brahman male may perform them. Moreover,one cannot lose one’s identity of being a Brahman, no matter what unethicalacts one may perform—an explicit rejection of Buddhist criticism of the castesystem and the Buddhist concept of merits as arising from ethical actions. Onthis issue Prabhakara was more liberal. He disagreed with Kumarila, holdingthat there is only the universal of humanness, shared by both Brahman anduntouchable, men as well as women. Prabhakara’s compromise left him vulnerableto subsequent neglect as Hinduism became definitively victorious overBuddhism, and Kumarila’s followers captured the slot in the attention spaceanchored in their uncompromising extremism.246 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThe outbreak of Advaita revolution inside the camp of Mimamsa radicalismis especially clear in the case of Mandana Mishra. Regarded as the thirdgreat systematizer of Mimamsa, Mandana was also known for his grammaticalcommentaries, in which he defended Bhartrihari’s sphota theory. Bhartriharihad worked on traditional Mimamsa turf; his defense of the cult of theword-Brahman, the identity of God with the syllable aum, was another versionof the old Mimamsa claim for the eternity of the Vedas as an eternity of sounds.Bhartrihari, however, had pushed the argument into an extreme monist direction,positing an undifferentiated transcendent unity which degenerates intothe illusory pluralism of words within time. Buddhist interest in the sphotatheory of eternal word-meanings, too, was no doubt one of the catalysts ofMimamsa creativity.There are echoes of this debate in the discussions between Prabhakara andKumarila. The former held, Bhartrihari-like, that the unit of meaning is thesentence, and that meanings do not exist apart from it, especially from thesentence verb, which shows the action which is the basis of the word-meaning.Prabhakara’s tendency to pragmatism and holism brought him close to Buddhistno-substance doctrine, and earned him the accusation by Advaitins suchas Shri Harsha (1100s) of being “a kinsman of Buddha” (Raju, 1985: 48).Kumarila replied to Prabhakara, with a characteristically radical pluralism andreification, that words have fixed meanings before and apart from their use.For Kumarila, as in the traditional Mimamsa, words are identical with theletters that make them up; in response to the criticism that words are pronounceddifferently by different speakers, he argued that the phonemes existin their own right, while each utterance is merely their realization (EIP, 1990:6; Halbfass, 1991: 372). Here, too, Bhartrihari’s influence shows in Kumarila’sconception of a universal not as a static entity but as a potentiality forrealization in time. Mandana in turn critiqued Kumarila and defended the fullforce of the sphota doctrine. Mandana attempted to make this consistent withMimamsa realism and its primacy of plural individuals by claiming that thesphota-meaning can be fully manifested in each phoneme (EIP, 1990: 181); ineffect this opened the way for seeing the empirical world of individuals asmanifesting a transcendental meaning at every point. One step beyond thiswould be to declare that meaning a unity, indeed Brahman itself; taking thisstep, Mandana became an Advaitin.The Break from Mimamsa Pluralism to Advaita Non-dualism. Advaita cameout of the Mimamsa network, and initially was identified as a branch ofMimamsa doctrine. Haribhadra, describing his “six darshanas” in the 700s,does not see a distinct Vedanta but only “Jaiminiya,” followers of the oldMimamsa sutra writer. The split in Mimamsa at first went under the names ofExternal and Internal Politics: India • 247Purva (earlier) Mimamsa (or Yajña-Mimamsa, the Mimamsa of sacrifice), andUttara (later or higher) Mimamsa, concerned with the doctrine of Brahman(Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 3:173, 286; Eliot, 1988: 2:310). The latter referredto commentaries stemming from Badarayana’s interpretation of the Upanishadsin the Brahma-sutra. But Badarayana, a possibly mythical figure whosetext may go back to the time of Jaimini’s Mimamsa sutras (ca. 100s b.c.e.?),was not yet an Advaitin. Badarayana lacked not only the explicitly technicalphilosophical argument that Shankara took from his Mimamsa connections,but also such distinctive doctrines as the ultimate unreality of the empiricalworld (Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 3:282–283). It is Shankara who attacks thepractice of treating Purva Mimamsa and Uttara Mimamsa as if they were oneshastra (“science”), and he sharply rejects the doctrines of his Mimamsa seniorsin the process of establishing his own school.Shankara criticizes all the other schools, Buddhist and Hindu alike. He isespecially hard on Kumarila’s Mimamsa for its pluralism and ultra-realism,and on Samkhya for its plurality of selves and its material substance. In stakingout the opposite position, Shankara has to walk a thin line in regard to callingthe world an illusion, maya, since this brings him dangerously onto Buddhistturf; and indeed Shankara is appropriating arguments from Madhyamika andYogacara.55 Shankara’s stroke is to posit a three-level world, rather than twolevels comprising nirvana and samsara, transcendence and world-illusion. Thethree levels are (1) the Absolute or Brahman; (2) Appearance; and (3) phenomenalillusion. The second level is our world of ordinary experience; thoughit is not ultimately real, nevertheless one can operate in it by the normalprinciples of perception and inference. On this level, logical relations continueto hold, including the principle of non-contradiction, and illusions such asthe rope/snake or logical impossibilities can be detected. Such relations aretranscended only on the level of the Absolute, which lies beyond the subjectobjectdistinction. Shankara rejects the Yogacara idealism in which the worldis a manifestation of the perceiving subject; as long as one operates on thelevel of Appearance, the world is objective and not an aspect of the mind. Thefalsity of the world emerges only from the standpoint of the higher Absolute.Shankara defends not the bald assertion of transcendental monism but themore nuanced position of ultimate non-dualism.Shankara’s Cogito. Shankara no longer accepts Brahman on tradition butpresents proofs. Shankara’s method, sharpened by the debates of his Mimamsapredecessors, is essentially epistemological. To doubt something requires thatthere be a ground on which doubt arises; to call anything self-contradictorypresupposes something non-contradictory (Brahma-sutra-bhasya 3.2.22). Theargument is a version of the cogito, but instead of proving the existence of the248 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsempirical self, it focuses on an absolute standpoint which is reached throughthe self.56 The highest standpoint, that which is ultimately and completely real,is that which is absolutely undoubtful; and this is Brahman, which admits nostandpoint from which it might be doubted. The world, by this criterion, isrelatively unreal, although it is relatively real when compared to the phenomenalillusions (e.g., rope/snakes) which it throws into doubt. The world shouldbe called neither real nor unreal, but appearance.Within the phenomenal world, however, the cogito leads to a world ofplural objects. The experience of the phenomenal “I” always includes a senseof separation from objects standing outside oneself (Brahma-sutra-bhasya2.2.28). It is this very plurality, and the possibility of subjecting objects tospecific doubts, that makes this world inferior to the higher Absolute, whichtranscends doubts by transcending the subject-object distinction.The problem then arises of accounting for how the Transcendent, aboutwhich no distinctions or qualifications can be made, gives rise to the world ofapparent plurality, how Brahman produces maya. Shankara adopts the positionof satkaryavada, the Parmenidean conception of being held by the Samkhyaand opposed by the Nyaya-Vaisheshika and Mimamsa. The world cannot beproduced by a relation of distinct cause and effect; for the relation between acause and its effect adds a third reality, the relation itself, and thus leads tothe necessity for further relations to fill in the intervening links, and these inturn to further relations, ad infinitum (Brahma-sutra-bhasya 2.1). It is anargument against the reality of distinctive causal moments, which reflectsbackwards to Nagarjuna and forwards to Bradley. The effect preexists in itscause, and indeed is ultimately non-different from it. How this could be sowould provide a fertile ground for differentiation among subsequent Advaitaphilosophers.Shankara became the most famous individual thinker in the history ofHindu philosophy by embodying almost every aspect of Hinduism’s rise toinstitutional and intellectual dominance. He critiqued rival positions across thefield, drawing from them a set of sophisticated technical arguments whilediscarding the rest. After Shankara, most other Hindu schools lost their capacityto generate further creativity; only Nyaya-Vaisheshika was able to riseto a new level of defense. Advaita laid down the basic position to which allother factions adapted, and out of which new lines of division emerged; itcontrolled not so much the solutions as the puzzle space of the new intellectualfield. Shankara was not the only individual who made the move towardAdvaita, with its combination of transcendental monism and world illusion.But Shankara was the great energy star, and his activities gave him severaladvantages in long-term reputation over predecessors such as Gaudapada andBhartrihari, as well as his contemporary Mandana.External and Internal Politics: India • 249Shankara as Turning Point of the Networks. Shankara’s creative energy camefrom his having grown up in close proximity to the surge of creativity of theMimamsa revolution; he reaped the charged-up energy of the group, while hiscosmopolitan travels put him in touch with the opportunities for filling theinstitutional gaps left by a declining Buddhist base. Shankara carried on theimpetus of establishing the basis of Hindu orthodoxy, but he broadened thecultural turf beyond Kumarila’s criterion of accepting the authority of theoldest Vedas (Smith, 1989: 18). Shankara’s lifework succeeded almost as if ithad been deliberately calculated to give Hinduism an institutional identity. Heproduced the first comprehensive set of commentaries on the Upanishads; theset of “major” Upanishads became those which Shankara selected.57 By institutionalizingthe enterprise of Upanishadic commentary, Shankara created adistinctive identity of “Vedanta,” to which his predecessors were retrospectivelyassimilated. Similarly it was Shankara who moved the Bhagavad Gitafrom the heterodoxy of Vaishnava theism (i.e., the worship of Vishnu asparamount god) into a topic for orthodox Brahmanical commentary (Raju,1985: 528).Shankara gave this intellectual program a material base by organizing aHindu order of celibate monks to take the place of the Buddhists, and establishingmaths as centers of scholarship to replace Nalanda and the Buddhistmahaviharas.58 Henceforward, the traditional Brahman householder-teacherrole would be challenged by a new form of organization for religious intellectuals.At the same time, Shankara separated his Smarta order from wanderingHindu ascetics such as the antinomian Shaivas by prohibiting extreme practicessuch as branding one’s body, as well as by establishing propertied settlements.Here too Shankara paralleled the original move which made Buddhist monasticismsuccessful, staking out a moderate path between organizational extremes.Fanning-out of Victorious Vedanta. Dominant intellectual positions split to fillthe available slots in the attention space, and the successful Advaita revolutionwas followed by subsidiary branchings. The creativity of philosophy is aprocess of controversies, and four positions emerge among Shankara’s contemporariesand followers. The main points at issue arise from the relation betweenBrahman and the world; the arguments hinge on older conceptions of substance,difference, and causality. The Vedantins were recirculating older culturalcapital in a new framework.Vedanta was not exclusively the development of Shankara, even in conjunctionwith predecessors such as Gaudapada and a few little-known earlierfigures whose doctrines were less clearly formed (Isayeva, 1993: 39–41). Amovement was forming around commentaries on the Brahmasutra and the250 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsstrategy of formulating a Hindu orthodoxy extracted from the Upanishads.One such position was the theistic school of thought called Bhedabhedavada,whose leading figures were Bhartriprapañcha (104 in the key to Figure 5.4)and Bhaskara. Accusing Shankara of capitulating to Dharmakirti, Bhaskaracountered that Brahman cannot be a consciousness devoid of attributes, norcan the world simply be maya, illusion, in the style of Buddhism. Brahman hasthe dual aspects of a transcendence beyond form while at the same timepossessing real characteristics as the cause of the world, which is manifestedas its effect (Isayeva, 1993: 14, 178, 243). In opposition to this more conventionaltheism, Advaita promoted as the central doctrine of the Vedantic tradition—and therefore of Hindu orthodoxy—the Upanishadic doctrine of theidentity of the human soul with the Absolute. For the first time among theorganized Hindu darshanas, the cosmos itself was to be interpreted as fundamentallyand solely consciousness. The territory proved to be fruitful in ambiguities.Within Advaita itself three stances emerged.Deep Troubles of Ontological Monism. The ex-Mimamsa philosopher MandanaMishra produced a version of Advaita which eventually became knownas Bhamati. To protect the purity of the higher Brahman, it gives a certainindependence to individual souls as the location of the ignorance which constitutesthe world of illusion. Using the tools of the logicians, Mandana pointsout there can be no relation between Brahman and nothing, since the relationwould lack one of its terms; the world exists in some sense, but it is“that about which one cannot speak” (Potter, 1976: 163; Halbfass, 1992: 44;Isayeva, 1993: 66–67). This resembles Dharmakirti’s inutterable “thusness”upon which distinctions are imposed by linguistic inference.The second stance of Advaita was formulated by Shankara’s pupil Padmapadaand developed by Prakashatman (in the period 1100–1300) and theso-called Vivarana school. They chose the other horn of the dilemma: ratherthan diminish the powers of Brahman, Brahman is declared to be the sourceof illusion. Vivarana comes close to absolute idealism and solipsism; it holdsthat the plurality of the world depends on the knowing subject, and theplurality of selves is an illusion like the many moons reflected in rippling water(Potter, 1976: 168–181). But Brahman itself must contain two natures, describedas essential and accidental: the pure witness consciousness, plus aprimal ignorance which is the material and efficient cause of the world. Thedifference between Bhamati and Vivarana Advaita parallels the differencesbetween Dharmakirti’s radical empiricism and Yogacara idealism in the Buddhistcamp (Potter, 1976: 232–233; Isayeva, 1993: 240–243).This idealist strand in turn was criticized by a third Advaita branch,stemming from Shankara’s pupil Sureshvara. The latter’s follower, Sarvajñat-External and Internal Politics: India • 251man, pointed out the conundrum: if the plurality of selves is an illusion, howcan one self become liberated without all the other selves being liberated atthe same time? Sureshvara held that there is no solution to the dilemmas oftranscendent unity versus the plurality of experience except to leap beyondconcepts. This version of Advaita resembles Buddhist Madhyamika. Sarvajñatmanargued in parallel to Nagarjuna, for whom samsara is the same as nirvana:after liberation the world does not disappear, but one has a flash of understandingbeyond distinctions (Potter, 1976: 180). This stance is the oppositeof Mandana’s emphasis on logical argument; it eventually became dominantin Advaita. Shankara was retrospectively interpreted as the champion of whatKarl Potter calls “leap-philosophy,” while the position of Mandana, whoseems to have been viewed by other schools as the leading Advaitin throughabout the 900s, eventually faded (EIP, 1981: 17). In this battle, Shankara’seventual fame rested on the organizational base of having founded an orderof monks, while his opponents were overshadowed even as their argumentswere picked up.The Advaita revolution reinstated a parallel to the three main schools oflate Buddhism on the Hindu side of the board: Bhamati, Vivarana, andSureshvara’s “leap-philosophy” parallel Dignaga-Dharmakirti negative logic,Yogacara, and Madhyamika. What is left out is Abhidharma pluralism andrealism, but this slot was already taken on the Hindu side by Nyaya-Vaisheshika, the one rival Hindu school which prospered after the advent ofAdvaita. To be sure, Advaita philosophers resisted their opponents’ charge thatthey were crypto-Buddhists, and stressed the difference between Buddhistmomentariness and the illusory nature of the self and their own emphasis ona permanent self which is identical with Brahman. In Potter’s view (1976) theAdvaita revolution shifted attention in philosophical space from the “left” sideof causal multiplicity to the “right” side of Parmenidean causal monism. But,given these shifts in the fundamental turf, the disappearance of Buddhism asan active player made available much of its cultural capital to be used in thenew context. And in the next round, as the mystical, anti-conceptual versionof Advaita (i.e., quasi-Madhyamika) gained dominance, the intellectual resourcesof its defeated rivals became available to fuel new rivals to Advaitawithin an expanding Vedanta camp.Jainas and Other Side Eddies:Intellectual Stability in Minor Long-Term NichesTo complete our picture of intellectual dynamics, we must pause to considerseveral positions notable for their conservatism amid the realignments goingon around them. Such schools exist for a very long time with little change or252 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsinternal disagreement in their intellectual stance. They have relatively littleeffect on the creative realignments of other factions; one could introduce thediscussion almost anywhere, since their positions rarely change, and anywherethey would tend to break the flow of the narrative. The difficulty of writingsmoothly about them illustrates exactly what was their problem in the intellectualfield: they were always a side issue, never able to get into the center ofthe argument. We see the pattern in three such schools.The Pudgalavadins were a well-established sect virtually throughout thelifetime of Buddhism in India. Although they were attacked both early (e.g.,by Moggaliputta-tissa, ca. 250 b.c.e.) and late (e.g., by Kamalashila, early 700sc.e.) for their doctrine of enduring personality, they appear to have undergoneno important intellectual changes. Their extreme position within Buddhism, aheresy from the point of view of every other sect, helped to keep themdoctrinally stable; their extremeness precluded alliances and the intellectualchanges that come with them. One is reminded of a parallel in Greek philosophy.The Epicureans were famous for the unusual stability of their doctrineacross the five hundred years of their existence, as well as for their socialisolation from other philosophers; this too fits the pattern of an extreme schoolat a disreputable end of the philosophical spectrum.Another such case is the Ajivikas, who originated in the same network asMahavira and the Buddha, and survived down through 900 c.e. (Basham,1951). Their distinctive doctrine was an extreme fatalism with regard tokarma, whose effects cannot be overcome by any effort. They also appropriatedthe early atomism of Pakudha Kaccayana. This gave them a distinctiveslice of intellectual turf among the movements of the time, whereas in socialpractice they were similar to the other charismatic ascetics, and especially closeto the Jainas in their nakedness and extreme asceticism. Although the apparentinconsistency between their fatalism and their liberation-seeking practices wasfrequently pointed out by their opponents, as often happens, the inconsistencydid not prevent them from surviving for many generations; external attacks ontheir emblematic doctrine may even have contributed to group solidarity.Such schools are long-standing when they have a stable niche, if only amodest one, in the realm of material support as well as within intellectualspace. The Jainas had a niche of this sort. The Jainas nicely illustrate thedifference between organizational fragmentation and intellectual splits. Sometimebetween 300 b.c.e. and 100 c.e., the Jainas split into two branches,Digambaras (“space-clad”) and Shvetambaras (“white-clad”); the former carriedon the old tradition of asceticism to the point of nakedness, while thelatter mitigated this strictness. This was a split over disciplinary practices andproperty, rather like the first Buddhist schism. The larger, more moderatewhite-clad branch went on to split further into some 84 sects, while the moreExternal and Internal Politics: India • 253extreme group maintained its unity (Raju, 1985: 105; Basham, 1989: 64;Chattopadhyaya, 1972: 132; Zimmer, 1951: 210–211; OHI, 1981: 80). Nevertheless,their differences were over minor matters of practice, and withoutconsequences for intellectual life.The first Jaina philosophers of individual fame appeared after the greatschism: Umasvati, who compiled the Jaina sutras, and Kundakunda, the secondgreat authority, both around 200–400 c.e. (Halbfass, 1992: 92). Although theJaina oral traditions were not put into writing until about 450 c.e., and bothnaked and clothed Jainas were active in philosophy, both branches acceptedessentially the same canon as well as the same leading philosophers andlogicians. This holds true throughout the entire history of Jainism. The Jainasbecame active members of the intellectual field, generally following trendsamong the Buddhists and Hindus. The early Jaina sutras from the oral traditiongive a sparse picture of the ascetic life of Mahavira, while the full-fledgedscriptures resemble contemporary Mahayana sutras such as the Lotus, full ofcosmic landscapes and huge expanses of time populated by predecessors to thefounder, now elevated in rather sybaritic splendor above a pantheon of Hindudeities.Early Jaina metaphysics resembles the Buddhist causal chain leading fromwrong knowledge to bondage in the mundane world. But the Jainas staked outa key difference early: they accepted the existence of the atman, or self—in facta plurality of selves—and argued against the single cosmic self defended by theAdvaitins, just as they disputed later Nyaya proofs of a highest God. For theJainas, the self is an extended substance, which varies in size to fit the body inwhich it is located. Each self is omniscient, knowing the past and future of theentire universe; but its knowledge becomes obscured by acquiring a coveringof karma, which is conceived as yet another material substance, something likeparticles of defiling dust. Jaina ontology carries on a rather naive realism orreification, treating abstract conceptions on the same level as material objects.59The extreme practices of Jaina penitences were conceived as wearing awayaccumulated karma until final release.Jaina philosophy became elaborated as something like an Abhidharmaclassification scheme, but one in which everything is treated as a substance,including motion, rest, space, and action. This classification of substances isreminiscent of the Nyaya and Vaisheshika ontologies developed in this period.The Jainas hit their most distinctive note as they began to criticize other schoolsfor being one-sided. The Buddhist doctrine that all is suffering is true from oneviewpoint, untrue from another. The same is said about the Sautrantika doctrinethat everything is fleeting, or the Sarvastivadin claim that everythingis substantial. The Jainas compromised among the various schools in theirintellectual environment. Their epistemology emerged when Siddhasena and254 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsAkalanka (600s–700s) joined the Buddhist-Hindu crossfire over logic. TheJainas added to the accepted logical categories another set of judgments,“indescribable” or “undecidable.” Cross-classifying these with the judgments“true” or “not true,” “exists” or “does not exist,” they built up a complexscholastic logic uniquely their own.Applying this logic to questions of ontology of the sort debated by theMadhyamikas and other Buddhist and Hindu schools, the Jainas held thatevery object has an infinity of modes or characteristics. All propositions aretrue from one point of view, false from another; every object is both identicalwith and different from every other.The Jainas’ defensiveness made them especially cosmopolitan, orientedtoward their outside rivals, while at the same time keeping them intellectuallyunified within. The first general survey of Indian philosophy was by the JainaHaribhadra, probably in the 700s, who formulated the rubric of “six darshanas,”and the scheme was promulgated by Jaina commentators throughout the1300s and 1400s. The Jainas’ became an unusually tolerant position withinthe heated disputes of Indian philosophy. This seems surprising from the pointof view of Jaina practice, which was the most extreme of any long-lastingIndian religion. One would hardly expect that naked fanatics who carriedasceticism to the extremes of covering their bodies with filth or starvingthemselves to death would care much about creating an abstract philosophy,much less one of harmony and compromise. Once again we see that it is theinteraction of positions within the intellectual space that shapes intellectualdevelopment, much more than the external conditions of life which constituteeach sect separately. The Jaina philosophy of seeing some valid aspect in everyposition gave them a kind of meta-position from which to survey the rest ofthe intellectual field, and which contributed to their intellectual survival as aunitary position. At the same time, this was a position that did not convinceanyone else, and the Jainas were largely ignored by their rivals. The Jainastrategy was a reliable but somewhat timid one. Like other tolerant onlookersthroughout intellectual history, it missed the creative energy that other intellectualfactions got from their more aggressive moves in disputing the changingterritories of intellectual space.The Post-Buddhist Resettlement of Intellectual TerritoriesAfter the Vedanta revolution, readjustment under the law of small numberswas once more set in motion. On the victorious side, the Advaita network splitinto three factions, along with a fourth Vedantic faction. On the fading Buddhistside, and among the non-Advaita Hindu schools, the tendency wastoward syncretism.External and Internal Politics: India • 255Syncretism in Dying BuddhismThe old Buddhist schools now drew together defensively. Shantarakshita andhis pupil Kamalashila in the mid-700s synthesized the rival Mahayana schoolsof Madhyamika and Yogacara, folding in Dharmakirti’s Sautrantika epistemologyas well (Raju, 1985: 161; Nakamura, 1980: 283). Kamalashila warded offHindu attacks on Dharmakirti’s logic while counterattacking every school:Samkhya and Kumarila’s Mimamsa soul reification, Nyaya-Vaisheshika universals,Yoga’s God, and the Upanishadic Vedantist self. Everything was drawninto this culminating and futile battle. The Yogacara-Madhyamika-logiciansynthesis was the last prominent school in technical Buddhist philosophy,and Shantarakshita and Kamalashila were the last important philosophers atNalanda; symptomatically, both ended up as missionaries in Tibet, along withPadma Sambhava, the proselytizer of tantric magic.60More popular but less intellectual was the rise of Vajrayana (“diamond vehicle”)tantrism. Here Buddhist transcendental salvation concerns were turnedinto this-worldly magic. Practices turned from sunyata meditation to visualizinginner god-forces and mandalas; chanting mantras whose syllables weresupposed to resonate with the bodily chakras of occult physiology; and sexual-yogic intercourse. Since the community of family-less and property-lessascetic monks was the organizational basis of Buddhism, sexual tantrisminvolving male and female devotees suggests a shift in that base; and indeed,most of the Buddhist intellectuals whose names we know from Dharmakirtionward were lay followers rather than monks.61 As the last outposts of Buddhismwere winnowed down to Kashmir and the Pala kingdom of Bengal, eventhe monastic universities became dominated by tantrists. What scholars werestill present were generally eclectics; some were reputed experts in all schoolsof Buddhism, but teaching Vajrayana seems to have been their biggest stockin trade.Tantrism was an end of philosophy, bringing Buddhism down to a lowerlevel of abstraction, as well as displacing most of its moral emphasis. It alsoacted as the last vehicle for syncretism. Even Nagarjuna’s name is attached tothe magic-alchemical texts which circulated from the 700s onward. Around1040, when Buddhism was about to expire in Bengal, a last philosopher,Ratnakarashanti, classified all the Buddhist sects into a sequence of understandingleading up to Vajrayana. In these late centuries the number of studentsdwindled to a few hundred, and the monastic universities were kept goingmainly by missionaries and foreign students (Dutt, 1962: 375). Already in the700s, Buddhist missionaries such as Amoghavajra introduced tantric rites intothe Chinese court, from whence they were further transmitted to Japan. Thefamous Tibetan adept Naropa began as admissions “gatekeeper” at Vik-256 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsramashila university, and the chain of founders of the major Tibetan sects(Tilopa–Naropa–Marpa–Mila Repa) derived from this tantric tradition inBengal.It is tempting to regard Buddhist tantrism as a submerging into a largerpan-Indian movement. The deities of energy forces, the practice of symbolworship, occult physiology chants, and orgiastic rites were spreading in themedieval centuries, especially in the Shaiva movement, which came fromoutside orthodox Hinduism (see note 62). But the Buddhist and non-Buddhisttantra had different trajectories. On the Buddhist side, tantrism was a last gasp;intellectually it became an umbrella under which rallied what was left ofBuddhist philosophy, fossilized and no longer undergoing creative development.Organizationally, it represented the decline of the monks and a shift ofthe last wavering center of support to the lay community—which is theunderlying organizational reason why philosophical abstraction was lost. Onthe non-Buddhist side, tantrism was going in the other direction, becomingrespectable in Hindu orthodoxy. Instead of losing intellectual acuteness, it wasbuilding it up, incorporating technical philosophy and moving from an inchoatemovement of primitive ritualists into a recognized part of the world ofeducated pandits.Nyaya Attack and Advaita Counterattack:The Sophistication of Indian DialecticsFrom now on our concern is exclusively with the Hindu side of the field. Withthe Advaita factions holding the major slots in the attention space, the otherdarshanas readjusted. Their first move was toward syncretism among themselves.Nyaya and Vaisheshika, already drawing together in tentative (if notuncontested) alliance against Buddhism at the time of Uddyotakara in the 500s,fused completely in the 700s (Halbfass, 1992: 73). The non-Vedanta schoolslost their edge as rivals within the Hindu camp and amalgamated with thedominant monism of the Advaitas. Vacaspati Mishra in the 900s was thesyncretizer of the losers, writing commentaries on Nyaya, Samkhya, Yoga,Mimamsa, and Advaita, the last two following the versions of Mandana,whose school Vacaspati seems to have continued at Mithila; even the versionof Advaita that he defended, Mandana’s Bhamati school, was losing groundto the branches spawned by Shankara’s pupils (see Figure 5.5).The adjustment in Samkhya was especially large. Samkhya had been thearchetypal Hindu philosophy for the centuries preceding the Mimamsa andAdvaita revolutions. Now its materialism and dualism had been repudiated bythe leaders; worse yet, the dominant Advaita had stolen the Samkhya theoryof inherent causation and aspects of its cosmology, incorporating them intoExternal and Internal Politics: India • 257FIGURE 5.5. HINDU OPPOSITIONS, 900–1500: NYAYA REALISTS,ADVAITA IDEALISTS, VAISHNAVA DUALISTS258 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthe intermediate levels of truth ascending to the undifferentiated Brahman (EIP,1987: 29–32; EIP, 1977: 453). From now on, Samkhya was a passive tradition,surviving at the hands of commentators who stressed its compatibilitywith the dominant schools. Mimamsa, too, dried up as a creative school. FirstPrabhakara and Mandana’s branches were driven out by Kumarila’s BhattaMimamsa, but even the latter became static, no longer engendering any creativityin later generations. Mimamsa had occupied the ultra-realist niche inintellectual space. Its rival in that slot, Nyaya-Vaisheshika, was the only Hinduschool which remained creative outside the Vedantic camp after the rise ofAdvaita; while the other darshanas were fading and syncretizing, Nyaya wenton the offensive against the new philosophical dominants, and later, sheddingVaisheshika metaphysics, produced a massive technical reform in its own ranksin the form of Neo-Nyaya.After 1000 came an upsurge of new conflicts in the Vedantist camp. Thetopics were theist and dualist challenges to Advaita monism, together with asharpening of logical tools and their incorporation into the metaphysical-theologicalbattles. A dress rehearsal for this set of conflicts had taken place severalgenerations earlier in Kashmir, encapsulated largely in Shaiva sectarianism.62In both cases an initial impetus came from logicians. We see this in the networkpatterns and the battle lines of the debates, and also in the gradual permeationof logical techniques into the sectarian philosophies. The inner politics ofIndian philosophy after the late 800s was in large part driven by the strugglesand mutual adjustments of Nyaya and Vedanta.Nyaya logicians were the most cosmopolitan of the philosophical schools,with close counterparts among the Buddhists and Jainas, and a good deal ofexchange across the lines. This distinctive niche within the larger intellectualcommunity kept Nyaya immune to the Vedantin dominance which destroyedthe other Hindu schools, and gave it the élan to launch a counterattack. Nyayahad already been involved in a long debate with the Buddhists over ontologicalissues. In conflict with Buddhist nominalism and its doctrine of the unrealityof aggregates, Nyaya and Vaisheshika formed a realist united front; across thegenerations, this realist position became increasingly extreme, defending thereality of substances, relations, and indeed all language categories as correspondingto real entities of the world. As philosophical discourse expanded thecategories of argument, Nyaya-Vaisheshika assimilated them to the positionthat everything could be treated as on the same level as everyday objectsperceptible by the senses; inherence, for instance, it treated as a kind of gluewhich exists eternally in the universe (Halbfass, 1992: 38; Stcherbatsky, 1962:1:25). This ontology was the opposite of Advaita with its transcendentalmonism, anti-conceptualism, and doctrine of world illusion. As Advaita tookExternal and Internal Politics: India • 259over Buddhist turf and that religion faded, the Nyaya-Vaisheshika allianceautomatically lined up against its successor.Naiyayikas from Uddyotakara in the 500s down through Shridhara in the990s combatted the Buddhist doctrine of momentariness—the basis for rejectingthe reality of aggregates—by arguing that it destroys the distinction betweenbeing and non-being. If each moment annihilates the last, is not annihilation(or negation) another entity added to the thing annihilated? The issuewas a hot one in the last generations of important Buddhist philosophers.Shantarakshita in the 700s countered that there is no combination of entities;“the momentary thing represents its own annihilation” (Halbfass, 1992: 151;Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:95). The arguments transferred readily to a Nyaya-Advaita clash. Against the Nyaya-Vaisheshika inherence entity relating a partto its whole, Shankara used an infinite regress argument paralleling Nagarjuna’scritique of substance philosophies and Shantarakshita’s denial of relations.Shridhara in turn responded by declaring that inherence exists by itsself-nature, not as the product of relationships. The issue was to become along-standing puzzle space on which Nyaya could operate; later the Neo-Nyaya school investigated in depth the concept of “self-linking connectors” inan attempt to clarify reciprocal and non-reciprocal relations among identity,dependence, and inherence (Potter, 1976: 122–128). The debate parallels Westerndiscussions around 1900 between Bradley and Russell about internal andexternal relations.In Kashmir, links between Buddhist and Hindu intellectuals were particularlyclose. Here, during the last fading of the Buddhist outpost, we find theupsurge of the new aggressive Nyaya, at just the time when the Shaiva ontologieswere being created. The most important Nyaya thinker since the 400s wasJayanta Bhatta, who founded a lineage in Kashmir in the late 800s. Jayantaattempted to show that everything knowable can be defined and thus is subjectto formal argument. This was an explicit counter-move against Advaita, whichhad argued that ultimate reality is indefinable. Since Shankara had placed thepath of knowledge higher than any other path, including faith and practice,Jayanta argued that Nyaya, rather than Advaita, should be the core of Hinduphilosophy. This claim was made even more strongly by Udayana (mid-1000s),considered the greatest of the Nyaya-Vaisheshikas, from their lineage headquartersat Mithila. Udayana explicitly subordinated every other position toNyaya; even Advaita was a preliminary stage for Nyaya, which he called the“ultimate Vedanta.” (Halbfass, 1991: 56, 310; Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 2:51;EIP, 1977: 10). Udayana now produced formal proofs of the existence of God,as supernatural cause of the world, as standard of right knowledge and ofauthoritative commandments. Nyaya became the upholder of a positive theologyagainst the non-conceptual reference point of the Advaita cogito.260 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsAbout a generation after Udayana, Shri Harsha launched an Advaita counterattack.63 He produced a detailed and comprehensive critique of empiricistontology and epistemology. He subjected to scrutiny the concepts in the Nyayaarmory, and in the Buddhist systems as well. ‘Being’, ‘cause’, ‘relation’, and‘class concept’ were criticized as leading to inevitable contradictions. Thenotion of ‘difference’ or ‘distinctness’ had been at the heart of Dignaga andDharmakirti’s logic; the relative non-reality of objects was covered by definingthem as the absence of an absence, a jar as the absence of non-jars. ShriHarsha refuted the very notion of ‘difference’, thereby setting up one of thestock topics of anti-Advaita debate. Shri Harsha attacked not only Nyaya butalso the memory of the now departed Buddhists, concentrating on the non-Madhyamika schools most remote from Advaita.64 Key Buddhist concepts suchas ‘non-being’ and ‘invariable concomitance’ (the chain of dependent origination)were subjected to dialectical debasement. Advaita had built originally byappropriating Buddhist shunyata, Nagarjuna’s aconceptualism, and the Madhyamikalevels of relative truth. Shri Harsha seems to have been attempting toshow that the advanced Advaita could burn down the Buddhist ladders bywhich it had arrived at its position. In this Shri Harsha was not entirelysuccessful, for a stock claim of later Vaishnava opponents was to accuseShankara, and even Shri Harsha himself, of being Buddhists in disguise (Raju,1985: 384–388; Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 2:125–171; Eliot, 1988: 2:73).Shri Harsha was the first of a series of distinguished Advaita dialecticians,who, not content with merely defending Advaita, took the offensive againstany concept wielded by their opponents. Shri Harsha and Chitsukha musteredsomething like the arguments of Berkeley and Hume, Kant and Bradley. Howcan there be knowledge of an object apart from the act of knowing it? Toassume an independent reality lands one in the contradiction of knowing theobject before one knows it. No one ever perceives a substance, but only groupsof qualities; and since qualities cannot act, how can there be action of objectsupon one another? The relation of substance and quality is incoherent; howcan a relation be related to its terms without infinite regress? The Advaitadialecticians maintained one distinctive twist of meditation-oriented Hinduism,that the “only reality is the self-luminous Brahman of pure consciousness”(Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 2:126). For “everything that is self-contradictory presupposessomething that is not self-contradictory; it is self-contradictory withreference to something,” the one point of ultimate if inexpressible reality (Raju,1985: 388).In the 1100s or 1200s, as the Vaishnava philosophers begin to carp atAdvaita from a renewed pluralist position in the Vedanta, another Advaita starappeared. Chitsukha added to the list of concepts which Shri Harsha haddemolished: time, space, numbers, and qualities are equally unreal and self-External and Internal Politics: India • 261contradictory, as are Nyaya-Vaisheshika distinction and distinctive identity.Chitsukha does not shrink from solipsism: his negative dialectics destroys everyitem of metaphysics except the self; without plurality or differentiation, thiscan only be solipsism. Chitsukha is one of the few philosophers in worldhistory frankly to embrace this conclusion.65As Advaita went to the anti-conceptual extreme in its battle with Nyayarealism, it opened up room for philosophies in the Vedanta camp to occupy amore commonsensical pluralist position. The dance of position and counterpositionwent on. In the next round the space vacated by the Advaitins wasexploited by Vaishnava sectarians, who developed a variety of positions whichqualified monism in varying degrees. During these generations of debate, bothAdvaita and its Vaishnava critics absorbed Nyaya logic even as they rejectedits ontological realism. This takeover of Nyaya turf led to one last surge ofNyaya independence, the movement of Neo-Nyaya formalism. With this,Indian philosophy reached a showdown of extremes.Ontological Turf Wars in Vedanta Monotheismand the Climax of Indian MetaphysicsLater Hindu philosophy came in the guise of sectarian religious battles. Aselsewhere in the world, theism emerged later in the philosophical networksthan the development of impersonal cosmologies and ontologies. Proponentsof rationalistic secularism tend to regard this as a backtracking or “failure ofnerve,” but theism is also a philosophical development from deep troubleswithin transcendent ontologies. Ramanuja in the 1000s to 1100s, Madhva inthe 1200s, Nimbarka who launched the Krishna movement in the 1300s,Chaitanya and Vallabha with the bhakti devotionalism of the late 1400s orearly 1500s: these are so many leaders of religious movements, their successorsmuch like anointed “pontiffs” of their “churches.” All these were Vaishnavas—followers of Vishnu, of whom Krishna was regarded as one name or manifestation—and much of intellectual as well as political life was taken up by theirquarrels with the Shaivas. Particularly in south India, communities were dividedand kings supported one faction while persecuting the other, sometimesdestroying their temples and killing or mutilating their priests (Dasgupta,1922–1955: 3:303, 113; 4:52–54). Nevertheless, under this surface of religiousargument was developed the highest level of sophistication in metaphysical andepistemological argument in Indian history. Logical tools sharpened over thecenturies became widespread in debate. Although the wider intellectual significanceis obscured by the sectarian context, the climax of Hindu philosophyproduced positions comparable to those of the Cartesians, Hume, and thelogical positivists, as well as the more predictable parallels to Spinoza, Berkeley,and Kant.262 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsGiven the dominance of an idealism exalting a transcendent spiritual center,it might seem surprising that Hindu orthodoxy should have produced thisvariety of positions. This variety is the product of two conditions. One is theinevitable workings of the intellectual law of small numbers: a dominantposition has a number of slots available in the attention space, and its thinkersfind the lines of dispute which can fill them. Philosophical division providesintellectual ammunition for religious factionalism, which thrives on the materialconditions of political decentralization and instability. The second conditionis the nature of theism itself. Theistic cults are closer to the conceptionsof everyday life, exalting an anthropomorphic god presiding over the world inwhich worshippers live. This sets up a tension with pure religious monism,which is the product of intellectuals who follow to its extreme implications theconcept of an all-powerful entity and reduce everything else to nothingness.Both sides of this argument can locate religious contradictions in the other.Using the criterion of highest respect for God, the monists can accuse the theistsof bringing God down to human categories and allowing the world to encroachon Its infinite capacity. Theists can accuse monists of disrespecting God bymerging Him with mere humans, demeaning the higher by absorbing it in theexperience of the lower. We see a parallel in the period of Christian ascendancyin the late Roman Empire, when the pure monism of Neoplatonism wascountered by the emphasis given by Christian theism to the independentexistence of the lower material world. The theist-monist debate is one of thosepuzzle spaces which can sustain interminable controversy, a fruitful territoryon which intellectuals can generate both passion and attention.Theological issues, departicularized, are issues of metaphysics. In the caseof Hindu theologies after Shankara, the metaphysical field forms around theassumption of a single highest substance. The struggle for intellectual differentiationcan then seize on the problems of explaining the experience ofempirical plurality—indeed the very existence of the phenomenal world—froma monist viewpoint. In addition to the obvious poles of monism and dualism,there are a number of intermediating tacks: substance and attribute, stasis andprocess, mind and body. The Indian development differs from the philosophicaltheology of Christendom and Islam by a greater emphasis on sheer ontologicalissues and less concern for the moral dimension of free will, divine foreknowledge,and responsibility for evil. This difference comes in part from the moredepersonalized theology of the Indian cosmology and its praxis of salvationthrough meditation or insight, as opposed to the Western insistence on Godas an authoritative Person and the concomitant praxis of salvation throughmoral attitudes. Thus the European philosophy which most resembles theVedantins’ is that of the period of transition to secularism, the post-medievalontologies worked out from Descartes through the German Idealists.In India after 1100 we see once again one side of the intellectual field splitExternal and Internal Politics: India • 263into subfactions, while the other side remains relatively stable. In this case thesplitters and innovators are the expanding movement of Vaishnavas. Thefollowers of Vishnu had never been strictly orthodox in the eyes of Hindupandits, since this meant a Brahmanical education guided by respect for theVedas. The Vaishnavas claimed their own revealed scriptures and thus wereregarded as something of a heretical challenge, although the popular appeal ofthe Vaishnava epic the Mahabharata enabled them to capture much of thecentral Hindu identity. The Shaivas had an even more shockingly unorthodoxbackground; but while skull-carrying phallic image worshippers repelled theorthodox, there were also more socially conventional followers of Shiva amongthe core intellectuals: generally they had the sympathy of the Nyayas andVaisheshikas, and Shankara himself was claimed by the Shaivas (perhapsinaccurately; EIP, 1981: 119; cf. Pandey, 1986; Eliot, 1988: 2:209–210). Atendency developed for Shaivism to be identified with Advaita monism, witha spiritual force which transcends the world through paradox into the unspeakable,whereas Vishnu acquired more of the normal qualities of theism, acreator-and-ruler God, and was thus philosophically compatible with pluralistpositions such as Samkhya and Mimamsa.Nevertheless, as Vaishnavism expanded and split, over the long run itappropriated a range of philosophical tools and acquired a variety of philosophicalpositions. The Vaishnava upsurge, from Ramanuja down to Nimbarka,was directed philosophically against the Advaitas. That is to say, theVaishnavas took the opposite philosophical tack from the most prominent andrespectable of the Shaivas, the well-established monastic movement foundedby Shankara. By challenging Shankarites, Ramanuja (ca. 1100) was making aclaim to bring Vaishnavas into an equal position of orthodoxy within Hinduism;he built an order of monks as a direct parallel and competition.66 Shankarahad explicitly rejected Vaishnava devotional theism as non-Vedic (Raju, 1985:438). Ramanuja, originally trained in Advaita philosophy in a Shaivite math,launched a counterattack against the Shankara ontology of Maya, the worldillusion which is mere appearance. Yamunacharya, Ramanuja’s predecessor,had already criticized Shankara’s fundamental argument, the cogito: the selfcannot perceive itself unless it is split, and to perceive the second one in turnleads to an infinite regress of separate selves (Potter, 1976: 83). Ramanujaexploited the pluralist tensions within monism, creating a position known asVishishtadvaita, qualified non-dualism. Brahman is the one reality, but themodes of its existence comprise both matter and souls and may be regardedas the body of God pervading the universe. Borrowing technical ammunitionfrom the Nyaya, Ramanuja describes the relation of the world to the Absolute,Spinoza-like, as that of attributes to an underlying substance.It follows that the visible world cannot be an illusion. Rejecting Shankara’s264 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsdistinction between appearance and ultimate reality brought Ramanuja ontoepistemological grounds. Shankara had epistemologized ontology, changing theveil of illusion from world substance to insubstantial ignorance. Shankaraargued that ultimate reality is unqualified and in the normal human senseunknowable. Ramanuja asserted instead that all knowledge is real and allarguments are qualified. Ramanuja used the principle of the self-validity ofknowledge, which originated with Prabhakara Mimamsa, and had been appropriatedfrom that declining school by the Advaita. But whereas the Advaitinsrecognized the existence of objects of knowledge, at least on the levelof worldly appearance, Ramanuja held that knowledge is self-valid in a muchmore absolute sense. (Raju, 1985: 440; Isayeva, 1993: 245–246). Inner experiences,even dreams and illusions, are self-valid, insofar as they are pragmaticallysignificant for the practical goals of life. And the practical goal is directcontact with Brahman, which is everywhere; there is no world of illusionsdistinct from the Absolute. This extreme epistemology became the hallmark ofthe Ramanuja school. To put it ontologically: consciousness is intentional,always carrying with it an object. Consciousness always thus involves plurality;and although such differentiating consciousness cannot be the Absolute substancebut only an attribute of it, the differentiatedness of world experience isnot to be denigrated as unreal. As the contemporary Advaita stars Shri Harshaand Chitsukha moved toward the dialectical dissolution of the empirical world,Ramanuja was moving in the opposite direction.The conflict of Shaivas against Vaishnavas in south India was the outerframework within which these philosophical moves were set in motion.Ramanuja’s creativity came from close-hand conflict with the sophisticatedAdvaita philosophy in which he was trained. The occasion for his split fromthis tradition was provided by his family network contact with a burgeoningVaishnava movement at just the time when it was ready to become organizationallyinstitutionalized. This in turn provided a base and a demand forphilosophical rationalization to match Shankara’s organization.Advaita and Vishishtadvaita as yet had explored only a relatively smallrange of ontological positions possible for monotheism. The emergence of fullfledgeddualism came next. Madhva (1197–1276?), leader of the second greatVaishnava movement, built his career through an even more extreme breakfrom the Advaitas. Born near the southern headquarters of the Shankaras, atShringeri in Mysore, Madhva was educated in Shankaraite maths but brokeaway into theism. Traveling through India, Madhva became a religious leader,working alleged miracles, meeting rival philosophers in the north, and stirringup waves of political battles, persecutions, and counter-persecutions in thesouth with the Shankarites. Madhva formulated a Calvinist-sounding theologyof salvation by grace: God remains separate from the lowly worshipper, andExternal and Internal Politics: India • 265the Advaita merging of man with God is treated as sacrilege (Dasgupta,1922–1955: 4:52–54; Eliot, 1988: 2:237–240; Potter, 1976: 249).On philosophical terrain, Madhva defended an explicitly pluralistic metaphysics.He repudiated not only Advaita but also the qualified non-dualism ofRamanuja. Seizing on prior traditions of logic, and occupying an intellectualspace left vacant since Dharmakirti’s Buddhist followers, Madhva argued thateverything is a particular, including both eternal and transient things, evenGod. The Nyaya-Vaisheshika included particulars among their fundamentalcategories, but had reified them as entities different from the substances inwhich they inhere. Madhva radicalized the concept, making the particular thebasic feature of beings; for it is “the power of everything to be itself” (Raju,1985: 475). Madhva similarly radicalized the concept of universals, whichNyaya-Vaisheshika treated as eternal entities. Madhva held that the universalsof non-transient entities are themselves transient, and he attacked anything likePlatonist realism in favor of an omni-particularism that cut through everyontological level. Through the same move, he counteracted the anti-conceptualdialectics of Advaitins such as Shri Harsha. The pluralistic world is real exactlyas it is—as particulars.In these same centuries (ca. late 1000s to early 1400s), Nimbarka launchedyet another Vaishnava sect. He and his followers continued the fight againstAdvaita, refuting Shankara on the illusory nature of the world but simultaneouslyseparating themselves from the philosophical terrain of the Ramanujans.Duality, Nimbarka holds, cannot be an attribute of Non-duality because attributesdistinguish a substance from other substances, but only one substanceexists. Duality is a subordinate reality within the Non-duality, and is bothdifferent and non-different from it: different because a subordinate dependentexistence; non-different because it has no independence existence. (Hence thename of the position, Dvaitadvaita.) Drawing on concepts from both Advaitaand the energy-ontology of Shaktism, Nimbarka describes the single Substanceas comprising a static self-identical aspect and a energetic and potentiatingaspect (Chattopadhyaya, 1979: 1:267–270; Isayeva, 1993: 250). The result issomething like Spinoza transposed into the Indian modalities of the aconceptualand the energizing rather than the mental and material.Vaishnava splits continued, led by Chaitanya in the 1400s or early 1500s,and soon after him by Vallabha (Eliot, 1988: 2:248–256; Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 4:320–448). Splitting from the Madhva sect, Chaitanya turned to bhaktidevotionalism. He repudiated his own youthful training in intellectual argumentand dominated debates by pure emotionalism. His Krishna sect downplayedasceticism and allowed its monks to marry; in place of ceremony,worship took the form of repetition of divine names to the accompaniment ofmusic and rhythmic bodily swaying. Chaitanya was known to dance until he266 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsbled from his pores, and to march obliviously into the ocean. Chaitanya leftno writings, although some of his followers and successors in the bhakti campcame back to articulate philosophy. Vallabha turned bhakti in the direction ofmonism, breaking from the long-standing allegiance of the Vaishnava movementswith some variety of dualism, holding that the Absolute comprises theworld as a relation of whole and part. There were now so many factions onthe Vaishnava side that they spread out imperially across ontological space.One faction among them, as the philosophical arguments of the schools hadgrown hyper-technical, even became part of the current of anti-intellectualism.Neo-Nyaya Formalism: Technical Logic andthe Clouding of Philosophical Attention SpaceAlong with the rise of Vaishnavism and its inner splits and its polemics withAdvaita had come the spread of argument about epistemological validity intoevery intellectual camp. The emergence of Advaita had stirred up a responsein Nyaya; in the next round, the Advaitins launched a deep refutation of Nyayawhich pushed them even further into anti-substantialist terrain. This Advaitaanti-conceptual monism left an opening into which moved the Ramanujansand Madhvas by reformulating anti-monist metaphysics; they also turned,sooner or later, to logical grounds for their polemics. Nyaya did not witherunder attack; instead it produced another wave of even more refined logic,which too was eventually taken up as a weapon by the sectarian schools.The most famous of the later Advaitins, Shri Harsha and Chitsukha, hadthrown down the gauntlet to conceptual and empirical logic in general. Thefounder of Neo-Nyaya, Gangesha, around 1350 countered this Advaita antilogicismby reforming logic so as to be immune to the dialectitians’ attacks onpositively expressed concepts. Shri Harsha had uncovered vicious regresseseverywhere. How is an individual known to be an instance of a universalwithout invoking yet another cognition of this relation, and then a cognitionof that cognition, and so on? Similarly, how are universals distinct from oneanother without qualities of distinctness which lead to yet another infiniteregress? And without distinctness, everything falls into the undifferentiatedmonism of Advaita. Gangesha responded by raising the level of reflection onthe role of primitive terms in philosophical argument (Phillips, 1995: 100–101,122–132). Cognitions, he held, are divided into determinate verbal awarenessand indeterminate awareness of primitives, which we recognize only uponanalysis. Questions of truth or falsity apply only to determinate awareness; theitems of indeterminate awareness simply are. Gangesha then defined the primitivesof his argument such that regress does not arise.By painstakingly classifying various types of absence or negation, Neo-External and Internal Politics: India • 267Nyaya rescued the crucial concept of distinctness, defining it as a particulartype of mutual absence between entities. The hallmark of the school was toproduce extremely complicated negative definitions for every part of the syllogism;‘smoke’ is rendered “the counterpart of the absolute non-existence of thesmoke” (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:482; 52). Neo-Nyaya appropriated the negativetheme of the now-defunct Buddhist logic; once the rival of Nyaya realism, itwas now pressed into service against monist inexpressibility in much the sameway that Dignaga countered Nagarjuna.The end result was to cut Neo-Nyaya loose from its longtime realist partner.It no longer carried the old alliance with Vaisheshika; instead it producedits own complex new theory of space and time. The last and most radicalleader of Neo-Nyaya, Raghunatha Shiromani in the late 1400s, underscoredthe independence of the logic school from its old ally by critiquing Vaisheshikaatomism. Raghunatha added new primitive terms to the Nyaya system of realsand reformulated the problem of ontological reduction. The traditional theoryof universals, which Naiyayikas had treated as something like the “naturalkinds” of Western philosophers in the mid-1900s, was no longer seen as thenatural cutting point of the universe; Raghunatha’s system became closer tonominalism.67Neo-Nyaya became something like the European logical positivism of theearly 1900s in its concern for extreme logical formalism and strict rigor. Bythe time Neo-Nyaya petered out in the 1600s, it had given up polemics withother schools and become preoccupied with technical minutiae.68 Its trajectorytoward ever-increasing formalism was more than a parochial development.Those schools of Indian philosophy which had not repudiated intellectual lifefor bhakti emotionalism were all becoming scholastic. The mainstream Advaitaschool, for all its doctrinal commitment to defending aconceptual reality,developed its own complicated logical formalism as early as the 1000s; thisso-called mahavidya mode of syllogistic argument even influenced the practiceof dialecticians such as Shri Harsha, and was an object of debate in the Nyayaschool before it formulated its own roundabout methods in the form ofNeo-Nyaya (EIP, 1977: 646–652; Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 2:119–125). TheMadhva school, too, institutionalized in its own monastic order, and its mathsadopted the successive reforms of logic for their own purposes; the Ramanujaschool resisted for a while but eventually acquired its own logicians. By the1300s, formalism had infected all the schools.Scholasticism and Syncretism in the Decline of Hindu PhilosophyThese centuries show a growing scholasticism throughout the field, rooted inthe routinization of studies in the maths, which turned even the hot religious268 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsissues of the past into historical compilations. The energy of Indian philosophywas dying of its own success, in much the same way that the technicalsophistication of the Nominalists in the Christian universities of Europe obscuredthe attention space in esoteric refinements. It is not merely that intellectualacuteness was lost as bhakti emotionalism gained popularity; the excitementof the intellectual networks was declining from within. Althoughlong-term reputations, especially of hyper-technical fields such as Neo-Nyaya,make it hard for us to appreciate it, this drying up occurred at the climax ofthe most sophisticated philosophical activity in Indian history.69 The creativenetworks lost their reputation and their impetus at a time of institutionalsuccess as well as cumulative development. The social pattern of such failuresis revealed by comparative analysis, provided at the end of Chapter 9.We see a tendency toward a “neutral” scholarly heritage in the growingacceptance of the “six darshanas” scheme. Originally this was the rubric usedby Jaina historians, on the sidelines of the intellectual action, observing thescene around them in the 700s. In the 1300s Vidyaranya introduced the “sixdarshanas” scheme into Hinduism; by this time it was already archaic, sinceYoga was hardly a live philosophical school, Vaisheshika was not independent,and virtually all the intellectual action would have to be categorized under thecontending varieties of Vedanta. Old schools were now revived, but more asmemories than as independent lineages defending their own positions; theirsharp edges were rounded off, and all were made compatible with a currentlyorthodox theism. The most independent as an organizational base seems tohave been Mimamsa, which still had its specialists in textual exegesis downinto the 1800s and beyond. Its glory days as a realist epistemology andontology had long since passed; abandoning its aggressive atheism, late Mimamsaturned theist.70The last creative flurry of Hindu philosophies was in the 1500s, this timelargely under the banner of syncretism. The last big name was Vijñanabhikshu,who put together a combination of scholastic doctrines—Mimamsa, Yoga,Nyaya, Samkhya, most of these long since fossilized and out of date—withcontemporary Vedanta. If Vijñanabhikshu drew together Hindu scholasticisminto a grand non-Advaita syncretism, Appaya Dikshita (ca. 1600) was thesyncretist within the monist camp. Considering the violence of the conflict inprevious centuries between Shaivas and Vaishnavas, this was a remarkableconciliation. The acute philosophical differences between Advaitins and pluralists,and the dialectics of conceptualist and aconceptualist epistemologies,were smoothed over, no longer a matter of living interest. This is not to saythat no one was still creatively defending a distinctive position in the 1500s;two of the great dialecticians, Madhusudana of the Advaitins and Vyasa-tirthaof the Madhvas, still carried on the debate over knowledge and world illusion.External and Internal Politics: India • 269Nevertheless, Madhusudana harmonized the Hindu sects as different paths tothe same goal, corresponding to different personal inclinations (Halbfass,1991: 73; Dasgupta, 1922–1955: 4:204–320). A new note was struck byPrakashananda (1500s); whereas other Advaitins were realists, decentering theperceiver from the ultimate transcendent reality, Prakashananda turned Advaitainto a pure Berkeleyesque subjectivism, in which objects come intoexistence when perceived and go out of existence when they are not perceived(Potter, 1976: 244–247).But this was to be the last piece of significant original philosophy. Syncretismbecame more and more the mode. Indian philosophers from the 1600son are minor figures, commentators on the old traditions. The Advaitins losttheir sharp edges and syncretized with their theist enemies. The writers of themost famous manuals put together Nyaya with Advaita and Mimamsa (Annambhatta,1500s), or Samkhya with Nyaya (Vamshidhara, 1700s). Afterabout 1550, Neo-Nyaya recombined with the older Nyaya. In the 1800s and1900s, Advaita became a kind of “official” philosophy of India, absorbingevery school into what Karl Potter calls a “bhaktized Advaita leap-philosophy,”that is to say, a faith that everything leads to the same spiritual conclusionalthough that conclusion is not in the end conceptually demonstrable.71 Thecreative conflicts of Indian philosophical history became sublimated into asentimentalized nativism.These modern philosophers syncretized positions whose political underpinningshad been weakened. They pulled together a Hindu national philosophyin united front against European colonial domination after 1800, and contrastedit as sharply as possible with modern European secularism and materialism.Just at this time the concept of a unitary “Hindu” culture was formulated,first by British administrators, then embraced by Indian nationaliststhemselves (Inden, 1992). But why did the syncretism set in even earlier, in the1500s? The reason is Islam. Although there had been prior inroads of Muslimconquerors in India, these had been relatively unstable conquest states largelyconfined to the northwest, until the Mogul Empire spread rapidly from Afghanistanbeginning in the 1560s through the 1600s to cover virtually all ofIndia. The great syncretizers Vijñanabhikshu and Appaya Dikshita lived duringthe late 1500s and early 1600s in the last major Hindu state in the south whilethis Muslim wave expanded; the later Hindu scholastics lived under Muslimrule or under the European colonials. In a much earlier wave of conquest,during the Islamic invasion of the Ganges around 1100, the Buddhists justbefore their fadeout were urging an alliance with Vaishnavas and Shaivas torepel the Islamic threat (Nakamura, 1980: 339). Dividing in strength, inweakness philosophies unite. Given that among the modes of syncretism thereis the sloppy loss of conceptual sharpness, there is generally more creativity intheir dividing than in their uniting.270 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsIronically, the anti-conceptual monism that modern Indians and Westernersalike tend to regard as the perennial philosophy of India came to dominatebecause of a recent turn in a long series of intellectual conflicts. The Muslimand European conquests, which put Hinduism into a philosophical united frontfor the first time in its long history, illustrate a deeper, more truly perennialprocess: the creative episodes of division and alliance inside intellectual space,each episode set off by the clashing of external political forces around itsorganizational base.