CHAPTER 6£Revolutions of the Organizational Base:Buddhist and Neo-Confucian ChinaPolitical and economic conditions affect ideas not directly but via the intermediatelevel of organizations supporting intellectual networks. In this chapter Ifocus on the middle level of causality. The example of medieval and earlymodern China allows us to see how creativity occurs under transitions bothon the way up and on the way down, in times of organizational growth andorganizational crisis and destruction.Transplanted from India, Buddhism dominated the intellectual life of medievalChina. This should be no surprise. At its core, Buddhism is an intellectuals’religion. Not that its doctrines are overtly favorable to intellectualism.On the contrary, the world of “name and form” is the obstacle to enlightenment,and intellectual attachments are just one of many to be rooted out. Atthe same time, the very structure of Buddhism as a hierarchy of meditatorsbrings its practitioners to focus on these mental obstacles. As its hierarchiesmounted higher and its historical traditions lengthened, the subtlety of itsanalyses mounted too. It is characteristic of Buddhist meditation to take apartthe world on the path toward Emptiness, and this gives scope for metaphysicalconstructions of just how the world of illusion is produced. Once such philosophicalsystems were formulated, there was strong incentive within Buddhismto take them apart in turn. This anti-intellectual religion bred its own intellectualsof an especially probing sort.In external respects, too, the organization of Buddhism provided fertileground for intellectual life of an extreme purity. As practitioners of a monasticreligion, devoted to withdrawing from the world, its monks were not preachersor administerers of sacraments to lay congregations. This ideal of Buddhistmonasticism often slipped away into practices of making a livelihood frompreaching, ritualism, or magical display. But the core form, the organizationof world-withdrawing meditators, gave Buddhism its central identity. Detachedfrom family life and practical concerns, focusing on the analysis of innerexperience, viewing even the particularism of gods and the ritualism of religion272as parts of the world of illusion to be transcended, the Buddhist monk mightbe regarded as living the life of philosophy at its extreme. Even religion in itsconventional sense, with its categories of salvation, immortality, and the sacred,constitutes no more than another set of attachments to be understood for whatthey are and thereby transcended. Buddhist enlightenment might itself be seenas the pure emotional energy of creative consciousness, detached from allcontents and transformed to the highest voltage by focusing on itself. Reflexiveinsight is raised to the status of a sacred act.All this rested on supporting conditions in the material world. Monasterieshad to have sources of revenue if monks were to devote themselves to meditation;Buddhist life at some level was always entwined with the mundanerealities of economics, politics, and social status. The social causality cut bothways. Not only can we trace the outward-to-inward flow of material conditionson the formation of Buddhist intellectual networks; but also we find a profoundtransformation of Chinese society resulting from the spread of monasteries.Corporations recruiting universally and operating outside the family-basedstructures of patrimonial society, the monasteries became centers of economicaccumulation and the cutting edge of structural change. If Europe with itsbureaucratic and capitalist structures was built upon Christianity—first of allthe monastic Christianity of the Middle Ages—China was no less shaped byan organizational revolution that was due in considerable part to medievalBuddhism. Both Europe and China, too, ended their period of medieval takeoffwith downsizing reformations. As the secular economy overflowed the monasticsector and state administration built on the new resources, the monasterieswere plundered and their rituals were displaced. Buddhist property was confiscatedfor lay ends; it was not lost, however, but turned into new channels, justas Buddhist intellectual sophistication was circulated in a new guise by theNeo-Confucians.The middle level of causality has a dynamic of its own. Buddhist organizationalgrowth not only affected the intellectuals within but also transformedthe surrounding political and economic structure. This did not happen withouta fight. Confucianism, and to some extent Taoism, grounded in the olderstructures, became bitter rivals of Buddhism. The political struggles that ensuedshaped the contours of intellectual life. Because its organizational base providedmore autonomy for abstract philosophy, Buddhists dominated the intellectualattention space for many generations. Political attacks from externalenemies had indirect effects. When the organizational base of court Buddhismbegan to crumble, the Ch’an (Zen) movement broke out in the branch ofBuddhism which moved to a safer base; still later, Neo-Confucianism representedthe intellectual creativity of transition when the Confucian literatiregained control of the means of intellectual production.Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 273We examine first the organizational growth of Buddhism in China and itssocial effects. Moving from outside toward the inner intellectual field, we takeup next the foreign relations of Buddhism with its rival religions. After this wecome to the inner patterns of creativity within the networks of Buddhistphilosophers, culminating in the grand visions of T’ien-t’ai and Hua-yen metaphysics,followed by the iconoclasm of Ch’an. Finally, as the material base ofBuddhism crumbled under political attack, we arrive at the outburst of Neo-Confucianism bound up with Buddhism’s fall and the rise of a new organizationalbase of intellectual life.Buddhism and the Organizational Transformation of Medieval ChinaBuddhism entered China in the Han dynasty and underwent tremendousgrowth during the period of disunity that followed.1 If the figures are evenapproximately accurate, around 550 c.e. as much as 4 to 6 percent of theChinese population were practicing Buddhist monks, along with their novicesand slaves (and even more in the northern states); around 830 c.e. the figuremust have been about 2 percent, in the late Sung (ca. 1220) the numbers werestill very large, but the overall population of China had grown, so that theBuddhist sector had declined to about 1 percent. During the T’ang, it isestimated that the annual money expenditure of the monks for subsistencealone was equal to one half of the state’s total revenue, and this did not includebuilding and investment expenditures by the Buddhists. For a time, Buddhistorganizations were bigger than the state.As the first universalistic mass religion, Buddhism brought a huge changein the structure of religious organization in China. Confucianism was a classspecificcult, the privilege and badge of the Chinese gentry. It might best becharacterized as a meta-religion, an elite policy of patronizing and administeringcourt rituals and traditional local cults; it was especially concerned toenforce the ancestral cult within families, using governmental punishments andrewards to ensure that the populace was continuously involved in the roundof rituals which bound them to family hierarchies, and through them to localgovernment (CHC, 1986: 552–553). Confucian officials deliberately regulatedtraditionalism and localism for purposes of central state control. The tendencyto deify Confucius merely added one more cult observance to this predominantlyparticularistic structure.Buddhism as a proselytizing religion of mass recruitment created a newkind of organization, breaking the ties of kinship and patrimonial household.Potentially such organizations could mobilize huge numbers of people.Whereas local cults kept the ongoing status order in place, mass religiousmovements could unleash waves of emotional enthusiasm for political up-274 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsheaval or new self-discipline. The openness of mass recruitment meant thatsuccessful religious organizations shifted toward a bureaucratic form of administration.Inadvertently an organizational weapon was shaped which couldbecome a state within the state, or an administrative adjunct allied to thesecular ruler. The far-flung organizational network extracted economic resourcesfrom traditional routines and reinvested them in new circuits of capital.As Buddhism became rich, it transformed the economic base of Chinese society,just as it later would the economy of Japan. Buddhism was bound to clashwith Confucianism, for it undermined the status order that Confucian ritualismupheld.Buddhism came into conflict with Taoism for a different reason. Theautonomous organization of religious specialists nevertheless had to gain afoothold by appealing to lay supporters. Especially in the early period ofBuddhism in China, when it confronted a localistic structure of clans, tribalconquerors, and autarkic estates, Buddhists accommodated to the traditionalidioms of concretized magic. Cosmopolitan monks, enveloped in religiouscharisma as the result of their own pursuit of transcendence, were treated aspossessors of magic usable for fecundity in childbearing or fertility of crops,for rainmaking, luck-bringing, or fortune-telling. At higher social ranks, thecourt aristocracy adopted the most elaborate Buddhist rituals for politicalimpressiveness and status display. At a later period tantrism, developed in Indiaat the time when autonomy of Buddist organization from the laity was crumbling,became popular at the Chinese court for its rituals invoking an aura ofmagic power by means of pictures, music, and gestures. On a more modestscale, little emotional eddies of magic ritual with cheaper props went at a retailrate among the common people; in this market niche Taoists were already onthe ground, and remained more successful than Buddhists.Taoism and Buddhism began as market competitors which gradually settledinto adjacent but overlapping niches. Taoism developed, not as an organizationof specialized religious practitioners but as a combination of several forms oflay practice, including the leisure pursuits of Chinese gentry, the ideologies ofpolitical dissidents, and the ritual lore of low-status folk magic and medicine.Taoism first acquired a churchlike organization as a political movement. In theFive Pecks of Grain movement at the end of the Han, its political-militarypower was based on exchange of ritual magic guaranteeing health in returnfor payments to support a regional government. Taoism only gradually, andin imitation of Buddhism, developed the more autonomous structures of monasterieswith rules of celibacy. Taoism had no strong central organization, andthere was a large variety of sects, perhaps 80 or more, many composed of laypractitioners (Welch, 1965: 144).Taoist religious ideology centered on the overlapping themes of health, lon-Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 275gevity, and immortality. On the continuum of religious aims, Taoism took upa spot adjacent to the goal of pure salvation or enlightenment. Immortalitywas close to salvation, but Taoist immortality was an extension of physicalwell-being into a transcendent, unearthly plane, or sometimes within the materialworld itself. The contrasting ideal of Buddhism was to become enlightenedout of the realm of bodily illusion entirely, although the Buddhist salvationcults which developed in China compromised this with the aim of rebirthin a future paradise.The difference between the pure transcendent and worldlier goals wasgrounded in the different forms of organization; the similarity came from ashared technology of religious practice. Both Taoism and Buddhism practicedmeditation; both surrounded this with ritual and liturgy. Similar techniques ofcontrolling breathing, concentrating attention, and focusing on inner experiencewere given different interpretations: one might focus on the Taoist 36,000interior gods in order to achieve what one believed was physical purificationand health (Welch, 1965: 106–107, 130–131), or on a Buddhist Bodhisattvasuch as Maitraya to attain rebirth in the Western Paradise, or on Emptinessto attain enlightenment; later the Confucians would adopt similar techniquesfor the purpose of Sagehood. These are micro-sociological techniques forconstructing interior realities. The ideas and experiences so constructed couldrange across the continuum from the worldly and particularistic up throughthe most rarified and metaphysical. The differences in these religions weredifferences in the ideological interpretations placed on their practices; and thesecame from the intellectual themes communicated through the larger organization.Buddhist monks, even when turned toward magical applications, werelinked to an organization of intellectuals specializing in an inward focus onpure transcendence; Taoism was linked more exclusively to the laity, whetherthese were the gentry, political dissidents, or low-status audiences for popularmagicians.Buddhism and Taoism at times came quite close to each other. In its earlycenturies in China, Buddhism had lost most of its meditative practices andmonastic discipline, and relied heavily on magical practices and ritual toimpress political patrons. Buddhism recovered its distinctiveness in a series ofreform movements, from 530 into the 800s, resulting in a variety of new sects,from elite movements such as T’ien-t’ai and Ch’an, to simplified salvation cultsof the personified quasi-deities Maitreya and Amitabha among the commonpeople. Taoism, battling Buddhism in the struggle for court patronage andimitating its organizational forms, moved closer to its doctrines as well; but itnever caught up with Buddhism’s organizational massiveness, and its primaryniche remained the magically oriented sphere of health and immortalityseeking.276 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsBuddhism’s main organizational advantage was that it was always centeredon full-time specialists cut loose from family ties, which is to say, monks. Taoistmonasticism, which developed in imitation of the Buddhists, was never asthoroughgoing or as successful. In its initial growth during the period ofdynastic division, the Taoist church was in the hands of families of southernaristocrats who used it to further their political interests; and later Taoismtended to center on small temples catering to the peasantry. Buddhist monasticism,by contrast, had achieved a spectacular success already in the period ofpost-Han disintegration. Its success was based on its material advantages intransforming a society in which most resources were locked up in patrimonialhouseholds. Because of their open recruitment and independence from familyinheritance of property, the monasteries provided a new organizational flexibilityfor structuring the economy. This in turn fostered the transformation ofChina into an expanding market economy, the first real takeoff of proto-capitalismin world history.2The Buddhist temples became great landowners, if not quite on the scaleof the Christian monasteries and cathedrals, which held one third of thecultivated land in medieval Europe. Especially during the period of the ethnicallyalien northern dynasties, the monasteries were centers for cultivatingconquered and devastated territories under the patronage of the kings; in muchthe same way early Christian monasteries and crusading orders were frontieroutposts for royal power in northern and eastern Europe. When the Toba rulersof the Northern Wei conquered Shantung in 467 c.e., they enslaved part ofthe population and put them to work cultivating fields given to the Buddhistmonasteries and doing manual labor on the monastery grounds. Local familieswere organized into Sangha Households responsible for collecting grain tobe stored at the monastery for redistribution at times of famine (Ch’en, 1964:154–157). Since land attached to the Sangha Households was free of taxation,other private families voluntarily attached themselves, and the institutionspread widely. Monasteries fostered economic expansion, increasing agriculturalproduction and opening up new agricultural lands. Monks used thestorehouses of grain to make loans at interest, thus turning to systematicspeculation and creating a financial marketplace.In the absence of a money economy, or of a state machinery strong enoughto collect taxes reliably, the monasteries with their stores of wealth and theirsystem of trading were the banks and the long-distance commercial structureof China. Buddhist monasteries, like their Christian counterparts in Europe,provided the systematic cultivation, reinvestment of profits, and even thebeginnings of industrial production which laid the foundations for growth inthe secular economy in the later T’ang and the Sung. Monasteries established“Inexhaustible Treasuries,” a kind of bank for goods donated by pious laypeo-Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 277ple (Ch’en, 1964: 265–266, 299–300). The famous Hua-tu temple in Chang-anduring the T’ang dynasty was fabulously wealthy; it made donations to thepoor, but accepted so many donations that it was able to make large loans andinvestments, and lay administrators embezzled sums to make private fortunes.Monasteries were also important in trade. The Ching-tu monastery in Tunhuangon the Central Asian trade route (about 920 c.e.) received half itsincome from interest on loans, another third from revenue from temple landsand rents of its oil presses (Ch’en, 1964: 266–267). In the large monasteries,wealth not needed for consumption or charity was typically put in the handsof a monastic agent who was charged with organizing trade caravans orotherwise investing it and returning a profit. Monastic wealth was transformedinto industrial production and technology (Needham, 1965: 400–403). Bigmonasteries acquired water mills, which they leased to private businesses oroperated themselves. These mills were sources of large profits, and during theT’ang were often objects of conflict with the government over irrigation rightsor exemption from taxation.To this intensive growth of the big monastic property holders around thechief administrative cities was added the extensive growth of local marketrelations in the rural countryside. The vehicle for this market spread was anew wave of popular theistic Buddhism. Most prominent was the Pure Landsect of Amitabha (Amida). There had been earlier worshippers of popularBuddhist deities; but from 530 through about 680 there appeared a muchlarger movement of simplified Buddhism promising rebirth in the WesternParadise simply by reciting the holy name. Its appearance at this time coincidedwith the economic reorganization of society. Partly owing to the stimulus ofthe larger monasteries, rural production was beginning to break out of localisolation, estate autarky, and direct government appropriation of surplus, andto develop rural market networks. Small Buddhist temples sprang up in thisnewly dynamic environment, and contributed in turn to expanding networksof travel and trade as well as to the spread of cultural capital. The wildfirespread of a simplified Buddhism in this situation marked the first penetrationof a universalistic religion into a truly mass market in China.As the centralized state and secular economy took hold, Buddhist organizationslost their economic centrality but remained useful in economicmaneuvering. The aristocracy would nominally give land to a temple in orderto evade taxation, while retaining use of it through provisions of the gift. Thegreat urban monasteries and those surrounding the capital became fabulouslywealthy. At the other end of the scale, small village temples and rural monasterieswere ill endowed, and staffed by poorly educated monks from the localpeasantry.During its height in the Northern and Southern dynasties and the T’ang,278 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthe wealth of the church made it a target for periodic persecutions andconfiscations. This too had its European parallels: the suppression and confiscationof the Templars by the French king in 1307, and the secular takeoverof monastic properties in the Protestant Reformation. Until the end of theT’ang, Buddhism had considerable resilience. The successive persecutions hithardest at the gentry Buddhists at the top of the church, leaving the popularbase intact; and the economic usefulness of its organization usually allowedthe elite superstructure to rebuild when political winds again blew morefavorably. The wealth and power of Buddhism fed the antagonism of Taoistsand Confucians. Confucians as state officials attacked Buddhism for withdrawingresources from the taxable control of the state. Taoists were vulnerable tothe same charge, but their poorer monastic organization made them a lesstempting target. At the same time, their emulation of Buddhism put the Taoistsin a direct competition over status, which made them the prime instigators ofthe persecutions of Buddhism. On occasion, pro-Buddhist reactions resulted incounter-suppressions of Taoists, though without much long-term effect. By theearly Sung, the Chinese market economy had far outgrown the Buddhist sector,and neither government nor aristocracy depended much on its material organization.The centrality of Buddhism within China came to an end; and with itsdecline, so too declined its Taoist imitation.Intellectual Foreign Relations ofBuddhism, Taoism, and ConfucianismDuring periods of weakness in their external fortunes, the “foreign policy” ofthese religions downplayed philosophical differences with their rivals. Conversely,strongly based religions became aggressive, scorning syncretism andattacking their enemies. From 165 to 400 c.e., when Buddhism was cautiouslymaking its way into China, it tended to syncretize, especially with Taoism. Aleading Buddhist monk maintained contact with the Taoist-oriented “PureConversation” circle in south China, translating Buddhist terms with Taoistterminology. Copyists borrowed almost word for word from the Tao Te Chingin translating Buddhist texts: “Emptiness [sunya] that can be made empty isnot true emptiness” (Zürcher, 1959; Demiéville, 1986: 839–840, 866–867).The process helped to mold what became the “Taoist” classics increasinglytoward the mystical side and away from their political or magical interpretations.Chinese intellectuals with an interest in mysticism were at first inclinedto favor Buddhism as an intellectual ally. Taoism was just becoming organized,and had as yet no clear intellectual identity. Nor was Taoism politicallypowerful. The Taoist churches which organized political rebellions among thepeasantry with millennial appeals merely added another military faction to anRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 279unstable struggle; so did families of Taoist aristocrats, who fomented palacecoups by occult prophecies and revelations. Buddhist organization was morestable. Its monasteries, holding independent property and united by lineagesowing allegiance to written scriptures, were able to shelter from political windswhile their material base grew. Governments often found economic and administrativeadvantages in an alliance with monasteries.Taoists came to seek the advantage of this organizational base. By the 420sin the Toba Empire of north China, the ruler set up a Taoist “pope” in hiscapital, with authority over the entire Taoist church. The “pope” had Buddhistmasters and network contacts, even with the famous Kumarajiva (Mather,1979: 112, 120–121). The code for Taoist monks was a direct imitation of theBuddhist vinaya rules. In the early 500s in the south, a canon of Taoistscriptures was formulated, an imitation of Buddhist sutras which came closeto plagiarism (Ofuchi, 1979: 267). Rivals for the same organizational nichebecame doctrinal enemies. Taoism now went on the offensive in doctrinaldisputes and instigated political persecutions of Buddhists. In the Toba state,Taoism was proclaimed the official faith in 444, and in 446 the Buddhists werepersecuted and their vast properties confiscated. A change in political fortunesafter a failed coup allowed the Buddhists to return in 454. In 520 and againin 555, court debates between Taoists and Buddhists ended with the Taoistsbanished and ordered to convert to Buddhism. In the south, a pro-Buddhistemperor in 517 abolished Taoist temples and defrocked their priests. In oneof the northern states Confucians were declared the victor in a debate in 573,and Confucianism was declared the state religion; both Taoism and Buddhismwere suppressed, and their property was confiscated.For many centuries none of these religions was successful in eliminating itsrivals. Confucians held a distinctive niche as officials, reviving their fortuneswhenever a centralized state expanded bureaucratic control. Beyond this Confucianswere ill suited to go. In the early T’ang, on the rebound from a stronglypro-Buddhist emperor in the preceding Sui dynasty, Confucianism becameinstitutionalized as a religion: every city had its state-supported Confucian or“literary” temple, including a school; Confucius and his seventy-two discipleswere represented by images and received sacrifices. But these Confucian templeshad no priests, and were guarded by local scholars and officials who nevercompeted seriously with Buddhism for popular support. Conversely, occasionalTaoist and Buddhist intrusions into government administration came to nothing.Buddhist theocracy under the empress Wu and her successor flourishedbriefly between 690 and 710; the next emperor, reversing course, built Taoisttemples in all cities, and required all nobles families to have a copy of the TaoTe Ching. In 741 Taoist works were made official classics, an alternate basis280 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsof civil service examinations alongside the Confucian texts; but this policylapsed with the crisis of the empire in 755 (Needham, 1956: 31–32; Welch,1965: 153; Cleary, 1986: xii; CHC, 1979: 411–412).None of these attempts to usurp the power of rival religions lasted longenough to be effective through the shifts of political faction and dynasticchange. The intermittent pattern of Buddhist persecution is reminiscent of thegrowth of Christianity in the Roman Empire. Occasional massive persecutionsbroke out when the insurgent organization was becoming threateningly large.The north China persecution of 574–577, just before the unifying Sui dynasty(589–618) shifted favor to Buddhism, is reminiscent of the great persecutionof Christianity in 303–311, just before Constantine shifted imperial favor toChristianity in 313. Revived Buddhist growth preceded the great persecutionof 845. The large-scale confiscations of property were virtually a matter oftaxation policy, allowing the monasteries breathing space to recover beforebeing put once again under material contribution. Hard-pressed rulers oftenwere motivated less by ideological fervor than by fiscal demands for the goldand jeweled statues of the temples which represented much of the movablewealth of the realm.Conflict is the driving force of intellectual change, but in these casesnothing was created on the level of abstract philosophy. Argument betweenTaoists and Buddhists remained at a very low level: Taoists claimed that LaoTzu had gone to the West (i.e., to India) in his old age and converted thebarbarians, who misinterpreted his doctrine as Buddhism; Buddhists in turnreplied that Lao Tzu was only a disciple of the Buddha (Demiéville, 1986:862–864; Welch, 1965: 151–155). Confucianism took no intellectual stimulationfrom its conflicts with Buddhism and Taoism: Confucians merely accusedtheir rivals of neglecting family and state duties by their monastic behavior, orridiculed meditation as “sitting like a blockhead.” Until the Neo-Confucianmovement emerged in the Sung dynasty, medieval Confucianism took the sideof rationalism and secularism by its opposition to religious opponents. Thedebates which took place among the three religions occurred in the externalarena, typically at court before a public of politicians weighing power shiftsand economic interests, not intellectual matters. Lacking insulation for theautonomy of pure intellectual struggle, the interreligious conflicts remained onthe particularistic level.Creative Philosophies in Chinese BuddhismThis inner autonomy emerged only within the Buddhist camp. Abstract philosophydeveloped in the big Buddhist monasteries, typically those at theRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 281PRINCIPAL CHINESE BUDDHIST MONASTERIES*  Buddhist monasteryô  Ch’an (Zen) monastery282 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathscapital under court patronage, but also in a few large, well-endowed mountaincenters. For centuries the core of the Buddhist community supported networksof intellectuals with considerable autonomy for their internal maneuvers. Decentralizedbases allowed rival sects and distinctive identities. What transmutedthis rivalry into intellectual creativity in the realm of philosophical abstractionwas the unifying focus of a few organizational centers where the networks ofleading monks crossed. The great translation centers at Loyang in the Tobadynasty and again during the T’ang at Ch’ang-an along with its Hua-yentemple; the famous monasteries at Lu-shan and Mount T’ien-t’ai in the south,and Shao-lin ssu in the north near Loyang: open to all comers, these placesfocused intellectual capital and generated debate. Multiple factions intersectedat a few centers of attention.3By around 500 c.e., the lineages of Buddhist philosophers in China wereabout six generations deep. They had already split into a number of factions:the Madhyamika–Three Treatise school, several Pure Land sects, the Sautrantikaschool, apparently also a lineage specializing in meditation (Ch’an, butwithout the antinomian qualities that later became the “Zen-like” trademarkof this school). In the 500s came several new waves of popular Buddhism,including Amidaism. Buddhism was fanning out to fill a broad doctrinal andintellectual space. These positions had all been imported from India or modifiedfrom Indian doctrines. So far there was no Chinese philosophical creativity inits own right, as imports filled all the niches of intellectual space. The greattranslator Kumarajiva indiscriminately imported rival positions, both Nagarjuna’sdialectical negation and the Sautrantika philosophy of world elements.Even so, the network structure that we see in Figure 6.1 for these generationshas the familiar shape: chains from one outstanding leader to another, and thesimultaneous appearance of opposing positions. For all his lack of originality,Kumarajiva served structurally as an energy node; his translation school atCh’ang-an became a center of attraction, and out of it proceeded the foundersof a variety of important positions and new monastic centers.Under the law of small numbers, the intellectual field was now becomingcrowded. By 600 appeared creative developments driven by the internal structureof Chinese philosophy. The first great development of Chinese Buddhistphilosophy, T’ien-t’ai, was a synthesis bringing order into the array of Buddhistschools. Imports were no longer substituting for indigenous creativity. WhenHsüan-tsang returned from India in 645 he received popular honor, but hisimported Yogacara doctrine did not dominate the attention space; instead,within his own circle of translators an opposing doctrine was stimulated inresponse to the challenge of Indian sophistication, Hua-yen metaphysics. A fewgenerations later came what I will call the Ch’an (or Zen) revolution, inresponse to a crisis in the material basis of the intellectual field.Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 283FIGURE 6.1. TAOIST CHURCH AND IMPORTED BUDDHISTSCHOOLS, 300–500284 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThe T’ien-t’ai HierarchyThe official organizer of T’ien-t’ai was Chih-I (538–597), who established thegreat Mount T’ien-t’ai monastery in Chekiang in 577, using revenues from anentire district given him by the southern emperor (Takakusu, [1956] 1973:126–141; Ch’en, 1964: 303–313; Fung, 1952–53: 360–383). Much of thephilosophical basis of the doctrine derived from his lineage of teachers, Huiwen(ca. 550) and Hui-ssu (515–577), who had attacked the worldliness andcorruption of the monks in the northern capital and striven to raise theintellectual and meditative traditions of Buddhism above magical, lay-orienteddoctrines. Chih-I’s synthesis introduced an order into the proliferation ofBuddhist texts, classifying them into levels of partial truths appropriate forteaching persons at successive stages of intellectual and spiritual development.All existing schools, Hinayana and Mahayana alike, were interpreted as a seriesof preliminary studies leading up to the crowning T’ien-t’ai doctrine. Possiblythe sequence was actually followed as a curriculum of education in the T’ient’aisect. From this time on, the great T’ien-t’ai monastery became a center forintellectuals of all Buddhist factions; it was from here above all that Buddhistphilosophy was exported to Japan.The T’ien-t’ai worldview built on Indian doctrines, such as the Nirvanasutra school, which had reified the symbolism of the scriptures (dharma) asBuddha’s earthly body into a cosmology in which the universe is literally thecosmic body of the Buddha. The Nirvana school justified this turn toward thephenomenal world by using the paradoxes of the Madhyamika school (i.e.,Nagarjuna’s Indian texts), which emphasized transcending all distinctions. TheT’ien-t’ai masters interpreted this to mean that the transcendental level ofmystical experience is identical with the phenomenal world of causality andwith the realm of name. There is no noumenal world apart from phenomena;all things are void, but at the same time all exist temporarily, and theseconditions interpenetrate each other.Applying this scheme, T’ien-t’ai took the concrete categories of popularBuddhist religion, from the various kinds of Buddhas down through the gods,humans, demons, and hell; arguing (on the basis of the interpenetration of allthings) that each of these categories, 10 in all, is immanent in all the others,T’ien-t’ai enumerated 100 realms. These in turn were cross-classified by 10metaphysical categories (form, nature, substance, force, action, cause, circumstance,effect, remuneration, and the ultimate state), and again by furtherdistinctions, yielding an architectonic system of 3,000 worlds. T’ien-t’ai managedto bring together into the same system the concrete mythology of Buddhistreligion along with a set of metaphysical abstractions. It took as its explicittopic the current problem of Chinese Buddhism, the disparity between popu-Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 285laristic concrete and abstract philosophical doctrines. The whole took anidealist turn with the assertion that all 3,000 worlds are found everywhere:“In every particle of dust, in every moment of thought, the whole universe iscontained” (Ch’en, 1964: 310). All phenomena of possible experience wererevealed as categories of an absolute mind embracing the universe.Hua-yen Metaphysics of ReflexivityAfter 600 c.e. the intellectual field reorganized. T’ien-t’ai absorbed most of theearlier schools, with the exception of the Pure Land sects, which were just thenundergoing their great expansion in the rural hinterlands; after this time wehear of no more developments in the Three Treatise school, Sautrantika, orindependent specialists in the Nirvana sutra or the Lotus sutra. At the time ofrenewed struggles between Buddhism and Taoism over support of the newT’ang emperor in the 620s, the monk Hsüan-tsang secretly left China againstimperial orders to make a pilgrimage to India. The situation of intellectualrealignment no doubt made it seem a propitious time to import new intellectualcapital. Hsüan-tsang spent 16 years (629–645) studying at the great Buddhistcenter at Nalanda, where he learned the sophisticated Yogacara idealismdirectly from the lineage of Vasubandhu and Dignaga, as well as the systematicHinayana realism of the Abhidharmakosha. Like other famous importers offoreign ideas (Kumarajiva, Cicero, the medieval Arab and Christian translators),Hsüan-tsang seems to have been more concerned with the sheer quantityof materials than the tensions among them, for he brought both of thesecomplex systems into China, setting up a bureau at the capital Ch’ang-an totranslate the Indian texts.The philosophical efforts of Hsüan-tsang and his disciple K’uei-chi (632–682) concentrated principally on the idealist side, formulating the Fa-hsiang,or “Consciousness-Only,” school. Based on the work of the great Indianlogicians, it was the most sophisticated level of philosophy yet seen in China,making many distinctions and arriving at high levels of abstraction. DespiteHsüan-tsang’s fame, the Consciousness-Only tradition was not carried beyondhis immediate followers. It has been suggested that technical philosophy of thissort was too abstract for the Chinese mind, but this begs the question why theChinese philosophical mentality did not develop further in this direction.4The weakness of the school was structural. Hsüan-tsang publicized not onebut two philosophies (Consciousness-Only and Abhidharma), and antitheticalones at that, muddying rather than clarifying the intellectual field. Hsüantsang’sphilosophies were upstaged by a proliferation of new developments,and two of Hsüan-tsang’s own pupils split off to create their own sects. If wedefocus from the individual to the network, we see a network in transformation.Figure 6.2 shows Hsüan-tsang and his group in the midst of lateral con-286 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsFIGURE 6.2. T’IEN-T’AI, YOGACARA, HUA-YEN, 500–800nections with the other main developments of the mid-600s: on one sidedebating with and training monks from the meditation school, on the otherside both propagating and debating with the emerging Hua-yen school. Hsüantsang’sreputation is the popular fame of the central node at the moment oftransition.5Of greater intellectual importance was Fa-tsang (643–712), associated withHsüan-tsang’s translation bureau in his youth, who opposed the Consciousness-Only doctrine with a new system, the Hua-yen school. Fa-tsang broughttogether the strands of several lineages. He had intellectual ancestors from boththe Pure Land and T’ien-t’ai traditions, as well as contact with several translatorsdirect from India. As in the case of most Buddhist philosophies, Hua-yenphilosophy had predecessors in the Indian scriptures, in this case the Avatamsakasutra, which had received a commentary from Vasubandhu (Takakusu,[1956] 1973: 109–113). The flowery rhetoric of the sutra, praising the Buddhain extravagant metaphor, was transformed into a technical philosophy of greatsubtlety by a chain of Chinese masters: Fa-shun (557–640; 221 in the key toFigure 6.2), Chih-yen (600–668, 228 in the key), and above all at the systematizinghands of Fa-tsang.The Consciousness-Only school described reality as a continually changingflow of ideas from the storehouse consciousness at the bottom of every individualmind. In contrast to this absolute idealism, the mature Hua-yen view iscloser to an objectivist realism, but with a distinctive Buddhist twist. It distinguishesthings as they appear from things as they really are. At the first waveof analysis, all aspects of apparent things disappear into emptiness. Things ofthe world exist only relative to one another, and thus do not exist independently.Things which change have no absolute existence (a parallel here toParmenides, as well as to Kuo Hsiang’s version of Dark Learning). And ideasexist only in the mind, not in reality. “Data are not themselves objects—theymust depend on the mind; mind is not of itself mind—it must depend on anobject” (Cleary, 1983: 24). Fa-tsang followed the path of undercutting thereality of the empirical world as if he were leading to a Platonic idealism, butthen pushed the argument to undercut ideas as well.There followed another wave of reflexivity. Transcendence is not to be madean object. Emptiness itself, the ultimate reality, interpenetrates the world ofappearance; indeed it is nothing more than appearance, impermanence, andchange. Each level mutually implies and requires the other. Phenomena couldnot exist if they were absolute; only their lack of inherent identity makes itpossible for them to be relative and changing. In the other direction, relativityand emptiness could not exist either if there were no phenomena as medium;transience cannot exist without time. Fa-tsang solved the Parmenidean paradoxnot by a transcendent substance but by the lack of substance. The interdepend-288 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsence of metaphysical levels is the ultimate reality. Fa-tsang described this in anumber of famous metaphors. Reality is a hall of mirrors endlessly reflectingone another; a circle of views through multiple gates, each in turn becomingthe center; a web of jewels, each of which reflects not only the other jewelsbut also the reflections in each other jewel, an infinity of infinities. This lastimage, the famous “Indra’s net,” is reminiscent of Leibniz’s universe of windowlessbut interconnected monads. Whereas Leibniz posits a “horizontal”mutual constitution of phenomenal attributes among substances of the world,the Hua-yen stresses the “vertical” mutuality of transcendence and appearance,and the ultimate reality of change.On the phenomenal level, too, everything interpenetrates. But this comesabout because the nature of everything is identically empty. The transience ofany particular thing is the same as the transience of anything else. In this waythe tip of a Buddha’s hair (or anything else) “contains the whole universe.”Hua-yen has something in common with a philosophy of continuous flux, aHeraclitean vision in which the logos itself is downgraded into one more itemin the metaphysical net. Hua-yen is far more metaphysical than the indigenousChinese flux philosophies, such as the Yi Ching Great Appendix, since Hua-yenundercuts any constituent elements other than the whole structure itself. Fatsangcriticizes any notion of emanation. The world does not originate or flowfrom vacuity or nothingness, but is continuously interdependent with it. Thereis no emanation of the “many” from the “one”; one and many, totality andpart, mutually imply each other, and cannot exist apart from each other(Cleary, 1983: 35). The cosmologies of the Sung Taoists and early Neo-Confucians,with their T’ai chi (“Great Ultimate”) giving rise to yin and yang, andthence onward through the hexagrams and their combinations, are thin andconcrete in comparison to the subtle metaphysics of Hua-yen.Unlike Consciousness-Only, Hua-yen philosophy was extremely successful.It enjoyed precedence at court, and was strong enough to have an internal split(between 263 and 264 in Figure 6.2) in the mid-to-late 700s, spreading overthe attention space at a time when most other Buddhist schools were disappearing.The last important Hua-yen master, Tsung-mi, came five generations afterFa-tsang. By this time, the early 800s, the crumbling of T’ang government andthe increasingly precarious position of court Buddhism had left only the decentralizedschools, Ch’an and Pure Land, as organizationally viable. Thetextually oriented schools could no longer support their grand philosophicalvisions alone and went looking for allies. Fa-tsang had classified the Buddhistphilosophies into a hierarchy, in effect a metaphysicalization of the hierarchyof positions in T’ien-t’ai classification a century earlier; indeed, Fa-tsang incorporatedT’ien-t’ai as a stage, now no longer at the top, but followed by Con-Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 289sciousness-Only, Ch’an, and finally Hua-yen itself as the highest stage ofenlightenment. Tsung-mi, broadening the synthesis even to external religiousallies, added Confucianism as the first step on the philosophical-religious path.Tsung-mi’s is the creativity of amalgamation in time of weakness. Havingstudied with Confucians, a Ch’an lineage as well as Hua-yen, he combined allthe positions, downplaying Ch’an antinomianism. The Ch’an school, nowbecoming increasingly institutionalized, was transforming its initially antiintellectualand anti-scriptural attitude into an intellectualism of its own;Tsung-mi’s doctrines were widely adopted in the Ch’an school, and survivedthere after his death, when the Hua-yen succession was broken and its majortexts lost.6The paradox of Ch’an anti-intellectualism combining with Hua-yen intellectualityis not so great as it might seem. Both in their own ways were at thetip of a hierarchy. Hua-yen crowned the networks of philosophical lineageswhich had been building up in China. Its vision of the interpenetration of everylevel of reality was a synthesis at the highest level of reflexive awareness onthe interpenetration of Buddhist doctrines. Ch’an, for all its surface anti-intellectualism,arose from a high level of intellectual reflexivity as well. The tworeflexivities merged without difficulty because the level of vision was muchthe same.The Ch’an (Zen) RevolutionCh’an originally meant “meditation” (Sanskrit dhyana, “concentration”),which was, after all, the original basis of Buddhism. The fact that there was aspecific meditation school in China, unlike in Indian Buddhism, indicates theextent to which the practice had become marginalized in the early centuries.The popular and politically influential schools, especially in the north, emphasizedmagic and liturgy; in the gentry-intellectual circles of the south, cleverconversation largely displaced meditation (Zürcher, 1959: 33, 114, 127, 146,180). The development of the intellectual schools, from Three Treatise toConsciousness-Only, made salvation a matter of insight, although the T’ien-t’aiand Hua-yen schools did incorporate considerable emphasis on meditation.What was distinctive about the Ch’an school in its full flowering was itsemphasis on meditation as a form of life—rather than as deep trance—togetherwith its hostility to all other forms of Buddhist practice.This anti-intellectual and anti-ritual theme appeared only after meditationspecialists had maintained a Chinese lineage for five or six generations. TheCh’an lineage is traced retrospectively back to Bodhidharma (ca. 500 c.e.,possibly mythical), and a number of successors are listed. It appears that theremay be a break between the alleged “third patriarch” and the fourth (213 and290 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Paths220 in Figures 6.2 and 6.3); the notable lineages start only after this time(Dumoulin, 1988: 98; McRae, 1986: 30). Several things are noticeable: noneof the early Ch’an masters had any of the idiosyncracies that we have come toassociate with “Zen”; and there was a tremendous proliferation of Ch’anlineages starting around 700, at the point when the school began to create itsiconoclastic style.The nature of the “Zen revolution” is best understood against the backdropof the political situation facing Buddhism at this time. As in medievalEurope, secular stratification penetrated the church. The official temples weresupported by the state and performed ceremonies connected with the imperialcult, and their leaders had de facto or even legal rank as court officials. Thewealthy urban monasteries and temples were dominated by monks from thehigher gentry, and the great abbots enjoyed lavish lifestyles. Especially in theleading establishments of the capital, high Buddhist figures held considerablepolitical influence in a friendly regime. During 672–705, patronage of Buddhismreached its apex. A former concubine of the emperor T’ai Tsung, whohad been for a while a Buddhist nun, became Empress Wu and then de factoruler around 680. From 690 to 701 she ruled openly, even establishing a newdynasty. Although she was deposed and the T’ang dynasty reestablished, in705–712 another empress and vehement supporter of Buddhism was elevatedto nearly the same power. Empress Wu attempted to supplant Confucianismand make Buddhism a state religion, with herself as Caesaro-papist ruler.With the overthrow of female rule came anti-Buddhist reaction. The newemperor Hsüan Tsung (r. 712–756) had 30,000 monks defrocked and madeTaoism a near-official religion. Yet popular support was too great for Buddhismto be hurt badly; the Amidaist temples among the people and the Ch’anmountain monasteries flourished, and there were still some prominent Hua-yenpreachers in the capital. After 755, the central government was too weak toenforce religious orthodoxy of any sort. A later Hua-yen master, Ch’eng-kuan,had a position of court influence from about 780 to 820, when the governmentwas again very pro-Buddhist; Ch’eng-kuan was made National Preceptor andofficial supervisor of the monks of all sects in China. In the 840s, the emperorWu Tsung wavered from Buddhism to Taoism; under the influence of a circleof Taoist alchemists, he issued a series of anti-Buddhist decrees, culminatingin the great persecution of 845 confiscating virtually all Buddhist property anddefrocking all monks and nuns. But the next year a new emperor called offthe persecution and had the head Taoist executed.After the failure of Empress Wu’s theocracy in the 690s, Buddhism wasmade subject to increasing government regulation. In 747, people wishing tobecome monks were required to get an ordination certificate from the Bureauof National Sacrifices. In 755, during the crisis of the An Lu-shan rebellion,Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 291the practice began of selling these certificates to raise revenue. Ordinationcarried economic advantages such as exemption from taxation and corvéelabor. The system gradually became very corrupt. Local officials began to sellordination certificates for their own benefit; many ordinations were purelynominal (Weinstein, 1987: 59–61). During the period of disintegration afterthe collapse of the T’ang (900–960), entry examinations for monasteries wereadministered not by monks but by government officials. These exams weresimilar to the Confucian ones; they called for composing an essay and acommentary, plus reciting a sutra and practicing meditation. Only Ch’anescaped from these restrictions, partly because its monasteries were remote andself-sufficient, partly because Ch’an monks avoided taking full ordinationexcept under special circumstances.The self-identification of Ch’an as a distinctive kind of Buddhism beganwith a controversy over legitimate lineage succession. In the year 734 the monkShen-hui (670–762) created a furor in the capital by declaring that the sixthhead of the Ch’an lineage was not Shen-hsiu (600–706)—a popular preacherwho had resided at Loyang as a favorite of the empress Wu—but Hui-neng(638–713), hitherto a relatively obscure southern monk. The attack was basedon the story that the fifth patriarch Hung-jen (602–675), had secretly giventhe succession to Hui-neng on the basis of his having won a contest of poems.This incident, which had allegedly taken place 60 years before, was notmentioned in any other document. The controversy among the Ch’an monksof the capital raged for 20 years. In 753 Shen-hui was arrested and banishedto the remote south; but two years later the government collapsed after militarydefeat followed by rebellion and civil war. In 757 Shen-hui was back in thecapital as a popular religious leader, and was even delegated to lead a moneyraisingcampaign for the bankrupt government by selling monastic ordinationcertificates.On the surface, this looks like a quarrel over political favors at court. The“Northern school” patriarch Shen-hsiu had been intimately connected withEmpress Wu’s Buddhist theocracy, which had been violently deposed, and othercourt supporters of the Ch’an lineage at the capital fell from power in the 730sand 740s (McRae, 1986: 242); the creation of an alternative lineage wasperhaps an attempt to dissociate Ch’an from unpopular political memories.More deeply, it was only the most dramatic manifestation of structural anddoctrinal movements that had already been in motion for two generations.7In Shen-hui’s polemic, the bone of contention between the “Northernschool” of Shen-hsiu and the “Southern school” of Hui-neng was the latter’sdefense of sudden as against gradual enlightenment. This seems to have beenan exaggeration. Neither of these was an organized school until after Shen-hui’sattack, and both branches shared a broad set of ideas and practices (McRae,292 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Paths1986: 245). Moreover, the issue of sudden enlightenment was a long-standingone; when it was raised by Tao Sheng 300 years before, it had broughtcontroversy but no new movement within Buddhism. The principal weaknessof the “Northern school” was its location at court, where it was exposed topolitical vicissitudes, and diluted its meditation practice with intellectual concessionsto the court literati. Neither the “Northern” nor the “Southern”faction continued long after this controversy; in Figure 6.3 we see that theirconnections were confined to the intellectual circles of the capital. The controversyof “Northern” and “Southern” schools was elevated retrospectively intoa symbol for the larger social movement. The real “Zen revolution” was takingplace among those lineages which cut themselves off from the basis of courtpatronage as sharply as possible.For these radicals, the doctrine of sudden enlightenment was pushed to anextreme and given a deep organizational significance. The conventional Mahayanapath to enlightenment was through a series of (usually 10) ranks ofspiritual achievement, which implied considerable social stratification withinthe monastic community. “Enlightenment” was the test by which a monk waspromoted to be head of the lineage, or to the rank of an abbot capable ofheading his own monastery. To attack the doctrine of the gradual stages ofenlightenment was to increase drastically the possibilities for mobility of religiousstatus within the meditation school. This took place within a context inwhich the openness or restrictedness of religious status was a matter of openconflict.8The radical Ch’an masters opened up elite religious mobility not withphilosophical argument but in practice. They eliminated liturgy and intellectualstudies, and even attacked the practice of prolonged meditation, substitutingtests of dramatic and paradoxical insight. The “Zen revolution” made possiblea rapid organizational growth, and at the same time legitimated decentralizationof self-supporting new monasteries and lineages. Some of the famousCh’an masters had as many as 100 enlightened disciples. The creativity associatedwith this process was an outburst of emotional energy flowing into anexplosion of organization-building.From the mid- and late 700s on appear the flamboyant characteristicsassociated with Zen. Ma-tsu (709–788) began to teach by means of paradoxicalsayings, out of which came the famous contests of repartee for which theZen quest for enlightenment came to be known. One of Ma-tsu’s pupils,Huai-hai (720–814), began the practice of requiring monks to engage inmanual labor. This was a sharp break with the old Buddhist custom of beggingfor alms, and with the prevalent Chinese Buddhist practice of living, oftenrather opulently, off gifts of land, serfs, and slaves from emperor or nobility.In place of the wealthy urban monasteries and lavish court circles in whichRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 293FIGURE 6.3. CASCADE OF CH’AN (ZEN) SCHOOLS, 635–935most of the leading monks (especially the famous intellectuals) lived, radicalCh’an moved into self-supporting monasteries, usually in remote mountains(see map, page 282). This had the effect of making Ch’an monasteries relativelysafe from political purges and economic confiscations, and hence contributedto the survival of Ch’an Buddhism at a time when most other Buddhist sectswere failing. Ch’an was not entirely original in requiring monks to work; somerural monasteries in the pre-T’ang southern dynasties had used this method ofself-support as a temporary expedient during political troubles. Within Ch’an,the obligation to work was connected to the doctrine of sudden enlightenment:ordinary physical actions—chopping wood, carrying water—could be a pathto the ultimate religious status. In this respect Ch’an is something like aProtestant ethic; and its opposition to deep trance-inducing meditation reinforcedits tendency to reduce barriers between the religious and secular realms.But enlightenment, sudden or not, was apparently not easy to come by; andthe abbots seem to have extracted a great deal of labor out of the lower-rankingand novice monks by this incentive. The Ch’an monasteries prospered materiallyat the same time that their reputation grew.In the 800s and 900s, Ch’an monasteries proliferated throughout China.This was the period of the famous masters whose doings were later to providethe study texts for Zen monks in China and Japan: Tê-shan (781–867), famousfor shocking his pupils into enlightenment by hitting them with his staff;Lin-chi (d. 867), known for his sudden shouts; and a host of other wittyparadoxers. This full-blown Zen was vehemently anti-intellectual and anti-liturgical;study of the scriptures was generally abjured, and a fortiori thephilosophers; even the Buddhas and Boddhisattvas were regarded as obstaclesto immediate enlightenment: “If you meet the Buddha, kill the Buddha!”Nevertheless, one would have to call this an intellectual’s anti-intellectualism,for only on the basis of subtle understandings and the ability to express themdelicately and poetically was one honored for this kind of stamping on sacredicons. Ch’an is philosophical reflexivity turned to a high level of self-consciousness.The creative conflicts which energize the intellectual attention space werehere transformed into the repartee of words pointing beyond words, of gesturesstripped to their capacity for pure contentless communication.Ch’an from 650 through 900 was in the factional mode of the intellectualfield. In Figures 6.2 and 6.3, we see the Ch’an lineages splitting and subsplitting,while the other Buddhist lineages are dropping out. The urban-basedintellectual schools fell away. T’ien-t’ai and Hua-yen, which had absorbed allthe earlier intellectual schools, managed to hang on only by syncretizing withthe Ch’an or Amidaist monasteries. Amidaism too was flourishing materially,but is not represented on the network chart among significant intellectuals. Afew more exotic materials were still being imported from India, but withoutRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 295long-lasting effects. In the early and mid-700s, tantric Buddhist masters madea showing at court with their elaborate magical and erotic ceremonies, fromwhence their doctrine was exported to Japan as Shingon; but tantric Buddhismnever achieved either a popular or an intellectual following and disappearedwith the changing tides at court around midcentury.Ch’an had the Buddhist side of the intellectual attention space to itself forsix or eight generations; indeed, in the absence of important activity fromTaoists or Confucians, it dominated philosophical creativity across the board.Under the law of small numbers, the internal dynamics of Ch’an itself nowproduced its own contending positions to fill the attention space. There werethe famous “five schools of Ch’an” during the 700s and 800s, a number whichis only approximate since some successions died out, while the surviving sectssplit to fill their space. Some of the weaker sects at the end of their linesfollowed the characteristic route of syncretism: the last important figure (291in Figure 6.3) of the weak Fa-yen sect of Ch’an attempted to syncretize Ch’anwith T’ien-t’ai and Amidaism; T’ien-t’ai Te-shao (292 in Figure 6.3) syncretizedthe Ch’an Ts’ao-Tung sect with T’ien-t’ai. After 950, while most of the otherCh’an sects were dying out or syncretizing, the Lin-chi lineage proliferated,building new monasteries across China and in the process splitting into subsects,as the Ts’ao-Tung sect had done in its heyday in the 800s. It is awonderfully symmetrical case of simultaneous growth and contraction ofdifferent parts of the field under the law of small numbers.9It is sometimes argued that the distinctiveness of Ch’an comes from theinfluence of Taoism on Chinese Buddhism. Vaguely similar paradoxical storiescenter on the early “Taoist” figure Chuang Tzu, and the Tao Te Ching extolsmystical transcendence of words. But at the time of the “Zen revolution,”contemporary Taoism was a highly liturgical church, with just those elementsof theistic hierarchies, magic, and immortality-seeking that were antitheticalto the Ch’an style. Taoist influence is structurally unlikely as well: the expanding,materially prospering Ch’an Buddhists were making themselves as distinctiveas possible, while syncretisms occurred in times of organizational weakness.There is some resemblance between the “light conversation” of the “SevenSages of the Bamboo Grove” and the poetic repartee of the Ch’an masters. But“light conversation” displays little that is comparable to the round of ongoingspiritual jousts that took place as the Ch’an masters traveled among themonasteries, testing one another and leaving a trail of iconoclastic moves atsuccessive levels of reflexivity. Organizationally, the “Seven Sages” lacked themonastic lineages which were so important in the growth of Ch’an. Insofar asCh’an is similar to the “Taoism” of the gentry, it is because they share somesimilar social conditions. Ch’an is Buddhism adapting to a niche away fromcourt settings and temple liturgies, based on the self-sufficiency of country296 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsestates. The difference is that the Taoist gentry owned their own property; theCh’an monks owned theirs collectively, and hence had to pay more attentionto organizational hierarchy in the legitimation of lineage masters.After 1000, the organizational bases of Buddhism within Chinese societywere undermined once again. This time the threat was not confiscation ofproperty or political purges. Buddhist monasteries and temples in the countrysideand remote mountains were no longer threats to the increasingly powerfulcentral bureaucracy; instead, Buddhism was strangled slowly by governmentregulation, instituted for the most part as fiscal measures. Sale of ordinationcertifications was revived under the Sung dynasty in 1067. This soon gave riseto market manipulations as individuals bought certificates not for their ownuse but for resale, speculating on future rises in price (Ch’en, 1964: 241–244,391–393). The long-term result was an inflationary spiral reducing the valueof the certificates. The Sung government also began to raise money by sellingthe higher monastic ranks, and in the 1100s added a series of monastic titlesto spur further purchases. The church prospered physically under this system;there were 460,000 monks and nuns in 1221, still a substantial number, if aproportional drop from the previous high of 700,000 around 830, when thepopulation was half as large. No doubt the market for ordination certificateshad an expansionary effect at the lower levels. But Buddhism died intellectuallyas governmental regulation set in. Only Ch’an was creative for a while, a directconsequence of its efforts to move to remote areas where it could escapegovernment regulation.Eventually even Ch’an creativity weakened and dried up. Externally, thereligious economy of the monasteries, once so important in opening up theagrarian state–coercive structure of China, was now surpassed by a burgeoningmarket economy in the secular society of the Sung. The status appeal ofBuddhist culture for the upper classes faded. Once members of the educatedgentry or court nobility might have frequented the more intellectual or colorfulBuddhist circles, or even pursued careers as abbots of the wealthier monasteries.Now there was a massive new pull on the cultivated classes from theexpansion of a government examination system and of Confucian schoolsconnected with it. Under declining resources, Ch’an lineages dwindled andnarrowed across the intellectual space.Even this last organizational transition had its own form of creativity.Stories of the classic paradoxes and repartees of the great Ch’an masters werenow collected: The Record of the Transmission of the Light in 1004, The BlueCliff Record in 1128, the Wu-men Kuan in 1229. Lineage factionalism was nolonger important; old rivals assembled into a grand retrospective coalition ofthis movement in decline. The later Ch’an masters added successive layers ofpoetic commentaries and meta-commentaries. In place of the live experiencesRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 297they depicted, these stories of six or eight generations past were now used ascases (Japanese: koan) on which students were tested. Intellectual eminencenow passed to the editors, who added layers of cryptical remarks and poeticlines to koan collections. The meta-comments themselves are repetitions of thekoan style, showing mastery by adding further twists, yet another panel in thehall of mirrors.In the following excerpt, the case is the koan, an incident from one of theT’ang masters, Pai Chang (720–814); the notes are by the Sung dynasty masterHsueh Tou Ch’ung Hsien (980–1052), who originally compiled the cases (kungan); the commentary is by Yüan Wu K’o Ch’in (1063–1135), who publishedthe whole as the Blue Cliff Record in 1128.CaseA monk asked Pai Chang, “What’s the extraordinary affair?”1Chang said: “Sitting alone on Ta Hsiung Mountain.”2The monk bowed;3 Chang thereupon hit him.4Notes1. There’s an echo in the words. He demonstrates his ability in aphrase. He flabbergasts people. Though this monk has eyes, he’snever seen.2. His awesome majestic air extends over the whole country. The onestanding and the one sitting are both defeated.3. A clever patchrobed monk! There still is such a man who wants tosee such things.4. Chang is a competent teacher of our school: why does he not speakmuch? The imperative is not carried out vainly.Commentary. . . This monk’s bowing was not the same as ordinary bowing: he hadto have eyes before he could do this. He didn’t spill all his guts to others.Though they knew each other, they acted like they didn’t. (Blue CliffRecord, 1977: 172)The great Ch’an anti-intellectuals, advocates of extreme spontaneity, werenow subjects of quasi-scholastic routine. The final burst of creative controversywithin Ch’an revolved around whether to accept this final stage of intellectualpractice. Ta-hui (ca. 1140) of the Lin-chi line, defending “koan-gazing Zen,”fought off the polemics of Hung-chih (352 in Figure 6.4) of the Ts’ao-Tungline, who upheld “silent-illumination Zen” (Dumoulin, 1988: 256–260; Kodera,1980: 85–101). But in the very next generation, Chu Hsi was already onthe scene, and Ta-hui’s disciples were most notable for their friendly discussionswith Neo-Confucians—the syncretizing sign of a declining intellectual base.298 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsCh’an creativity disappeared into the dominance of Neo-Confucianism, andwith it ended fresh intellectual developments in Chinese Buddhism.The Neo-Confucian RevivalThe wave of philosophical creativity that made up Neo-Confucianism fits theclassic pattern of reciprocal expansion and decline under the law of smallnumbers. In the network of Figure 6.4, we see Buddhist philosophy decliningand syncretizing, while the Confucians expand and subdivide into contendingfactions. The apex is Chu Hsi’s grand synthesis, bringing together the factionsinto a dominant Neo-Confucianism, in counterpoint with a new metaphysicalidealism. Neo-Confucianism was known to its contemporaries as “Tao-hsüeh,”the Tao-learning, implying that it was appropriating (or reappropriating) conceptscirculating in the Taoist world, and which had been out of style inorthodox Confucianism. Neo-Confucianism was in part a religious movement,which took over cultural capital both from Taoism and from Ch’an Buddhism.Religious territories were realigning as part of an organizational transformationin the basis of intellectual life. This is what underlies the historicalmoment of philosophical creativity. Neo-Confucianism broke out at just thetime of major political upheaval. The Sung dynasty drastically expanded thesize and intensity of government bureaucracy and the examination system forselecting officials. Rudiments of the examination system had existed before,but the Sung was the first to be truly a scholars’ government. It was also aperiod of massive economic growth, the takeoff of a market economy freedfrom government control. The resulting situation of population displacement,financial inflation, and government fiscal crisis led to the emergence of partypolitics and ideologies. The height of the party struggle, the famous WangAn-shih reforms, coincided with the generation that crystallized a Neo-Confucianphilosophy. Moreover, this period was a high point of the natural sciencesin Chinese history, as well as a time of creativity in poetry.The Neo-Confucian movement was directly connected to all these networks,generally in opposition: to the expanding examination system, to theWang An-shih reforms, and to the poets. Neo-Confucianism was in largemeasure a reactionary movement; its creative energy in philosophy came fromits oppositional stance in the political conflicts of the time. In some respectsthe Neo-Confucians were radical innovators: in overturning the traditionalConfucian stance on religion, as well as in their participation in the scientificempiricism of the time. The creativity of Neo-Confucian philosophy was aprocess of maneuvering in the cultural space opened up through the multi-sidedinstitutional transformations of Sung society. Let us examine its componentsin turn.Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 299FIGURE 6.4. NEO-CONFUCIAN MOVEMENT AND THEWINNOWING OF ZEN, 935–1265Political Struggle and the Wang An-shih Economic ReformsThe Sung dynasty was experiencing a takeoff of economic growth, making itthe most productive economy thus far in the history of the world. Along withthis prosperity came financial and military strains. Sung government incomepeaked in 1021, then declined into chronic revenue crisis; inflation and polarizationof wealth produced a sense of upheaval that had become acute by the1060s. Wang An-shih (1021–1086) proposed radical reforms, including pricecontrols, new taxes aimed at the large landlords, and low-cost credit for smallfarmers. His reforms were supported by the young emperor Shen Tsung duringhis reign (1068–1085); Wang served as prime minister from 1069 to 1076,during which time he reformed the exam system to include engineering andscience subjects instead of the literary classics. But there was considerableopposition even under Emperor Shen Tsung, and in 1086 Ssu-ma Kuangbecame prime minister in a new regime that undid the reforms.The Neo-Confucian movement as a whole constituted one of three interconnectedgroups whose struggles made up the politics of the mid-Sung dynasty.Despite doctrinal disagreements among themselves, the Ch’eng brothersand their friends and teachers Chou Tun-I, Shao Yung, and Chang Tsai wereunited in opposition to the economic reform movement. Ssu-ma Kuang (1019–1086), himself a major scholar and historian, was the friend of both Shao Yungand Chang Tsai and patron of the Ch’eng brothers; he was the most importantpolitical leader of the anti-reform group.In a second camp were followers of the reformer Wang An-shih. Hispolitical and economic movement also had an intellectual side—not surprisingin a period when the examination system administered by scholars had becomethe most important route to high office. Wang An-shih, himself a poet andscholar, led a group of scholars in revising the Confucian classics to justifystate controls.A third group comprised orthodox Confucians who defended literary andtextual scholarship against Neo-Confucian religiousness as well as against theeconomic reformers. This orthodox faction also had its significant network: inFigure 6.4 we see the chains around the notable scholars Fan Chung-yen (313)and Ouyang Hsiu (314), as well as Hü Yuan (the orthodox teacher of theCh’eng brothers) and Sun Fu (315). In the earlier years of the century, theyhad been the reforming faction within Sung politics (Liu, 1967). Wang An-shih,a protégé of Ouyang Hsiu, carried the reform movement in a more radicaldirection at a time when the older generation were pulling back, exaltingliterary cultivation as a standard of gentility which they expected to providesocial leadership. Toward the latter part of the century, the leadership of theconservative clique was taken over by a family of noted poets, headed by SuRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 301Hsun (317) and his son Su Shih (1036–1101), one of the most famous of allChinese poets—and, despite political enmity, a literary friend of Wang An-shih.The Neo-Confucians carried out a two-pronged fight against both wings.Ch’eng I was an uncompromising moralist and struck out against literaryConfucianism. Chou Tun-I too had declared, “Those who engage in purelyliterary expressions are vulgar people” (Chan, 1963: 478). To carry out ananti-literary reform of the examination system was to strike at the statusculture of the mainline Confucians; opposition from the orthodox side doggedthe Neo-Confucians for generations, down to the time of Chu Hsi.The careers of the core Neo-Confucians were tied up with the struggleagainst Wang An-shih. Ch’eng Hao was demoted in 1070 for opposing thenew reforms, and again 10 years later after he had made his way back intofavor; Ch’eng I held himself remote from official position during the WangAn-shih period. Chang Tsai and Chou Tun-I resigned from the government atthe beginning of the reforms, and advocated counter-reforms such as a returnto the archaic land tenure arrangements of the ancient texts. In contrast toWang An-shih’s utilitarian policies, the Neo-Confucians declared that reformmust be moral and ceremonial. “To hope for perfect government withoutrestoring ancient and changing modern music is to be far off the mark” (Chan,1963: 473): this was a characteristic utterance of Chou Tun-I.The Wang An-shih reformers held power only briefly, but the struggle offactions went on for some time. Ch’eng I became director of education (1087)in the regime following the reforming emperor’s death, but was twice dismissedfrom office, banished, and had his teaching prohibited, as well as being twicepardoned and returned to office before his death in 1106. The Wang An-shihgroup briefly recaptured power at the turn of the century, while the orthodoxConfucians around Su Shih fought for their version of hegemony. Still otherchanges in direction were instituted after 1100 by Hui-tsung, an artist-emperorwho was hostile to the moralistic and anti-literary Neo-Confucians as well asto the economic reformers. None of these maneuverings improved the financialweakness of the government; crumbling militarily, the Sung was forced to movesouth in 1127 when north China was overrun by the tribal Jürchen kingdom.The Examination System and the Growth of SchoolingThe Sung emperors were committed to a policy of civilian control, and builtup the formal examination system as a device to keep government free ofmilitary dominance. As the gentry class competed over educational qualifications,the size and elaborateness of the examination system developed enormously.In the T’ang there was one examination, open to candidates recommendedby prefectural officials or to students at the schools in the capital for302 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsrelatives of officials (Chaffee, 1985: 15–23). These and other preferential pathsfor families already in the elite remained and even expanded in the Sung; buta sequence of more openly competitive examinations developed alongsidethem. The most important route went from local prefectural examinations(conferring the degree of chü-jen) to the metropolitan examinations, fromwhose graduates (chin-shih) officials were selected.Competitiveness also accelerated drastically, with the first big crunch coincidingwith the Neo-Confucian movement. The system had begun to expandearly in the Sung. Between 977 and 992, the number of candidates for themetropolitan examination grew from 5,000 to 17,000. At the prefecturalqualifying examinations, there were between 20,000 and 30,000 candidates inthe early decades after 1000 c.e., and 80,000 around 1100, burgeoning to400,000 near the end of the dynasty around 1250 (Chaffee, 1985: 35–36,50–53). At the end of the funnel, however, the numbers of chin-shih who wererecruited in each round of examinations averaged fewer than 200 (Chaffee,1985: 16). Quotas were set for the lower examination as well, and thesebecame increasingly restrictive. In the years between 1005 and 1026, 40 to 50percent of candidates were awarded the chü-jen degree; but this figure beganto drop sharply in the 1030s and 1040s, falling to 10 percent in 1066. Thiswas the period when the early Neo-Confucian movement was forming, as wellas the time of various reform movements, leading right up to the Wang An-shihreforms in 1069. Reforms increased competitiveness still further; by the SouthernSung, ratios had fallen another quantum leap, to 1 in 100 in 1156 and 1in 200 in 1275. This enormous competitiveness was to continue in the Mingand Ch’ing dynasties, making preparation for repeated examinations virtuallya lifetime pursuit of the gentry class.Gentry politics and social organization came to center increasingly on issuesof access to education or alternate routes to office. There were struggles overthe content of the examinations; various factions of “reformers” pushed foremphasis on the Confucian classics, poetic style, relevance to governmentalpolicy, or specialized subjects such as technical and scientific fields. Within thisstruggle, the Neo-Confucians tended to take an extreme position: they wereopposed to the examination system per se as a method of selecting officials,since its formal, anonymous procedures and its emphasis on written scholarshipruled out the selection of men on the basis of their demonstrated moralqualities such as loyalty and filial piety. Chang Tsai advocated instead recruitmentfrom the kin of illustrious families as a method of applying Confucianvalues. The Neo-Confucians represent a split in the Confucian ranks, dividingthose who emphasized their qualifications as literati from those stressing themoral content of their familistic ideology.Nevertheless, all these factions depended on the changes in the organizationRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 303of intellectual life brought about by the expansion of examinations. For themost part, gentry prepared for the competitions by private study. With growingcompetitiveness, large numbers of scholars who had not passed the finalexamination or who were out of office because of politics were becomingavailable as private teachers. There was a large increase in the number ofschools, including those established in local Confucian temples, as well asBuddhist schools and the private academies of well-known scholars. Famousscholar-officials continued to teach personal disciples while in their officialposts. Some schools were official, notably the Imperial University and otherschools in the capital such as the Directory of Education; initially for sons ofofficials, they began to be opened to others in the 1040s (Chaffee, 1985: 30,73–80). Local government schools were also promoted, with the height ofschool-building during 1020–1060—again, the early takeoff point for theNeo-Confucian movement.During 1100–1120 yet another twist of factional reforms brought a radicaleffort to replace the examination system with a hierarchy of governmentschools. These comprised primary, county, and prefectural schools, each dividedinto three grades; promotion from rung to rung in this ladder was basedon internal examinations, leading finally to selection for the Imperial Universityand thence to the chin-shih degree for officials. This system attempted tocombine the supervision of moral character with academic testing. Its policywas a compromise among the different factional positions. But it was administeredin a spirit of hostility to most of them, especially to the Neo-Confucians;“unorthodox” books and ideas were banned and private schools prohibited.These government schools enrolled 200,000 students. The expense of supplyingthem with room and board brought the system to an end in 1121. Subsequently,private and locally controlled education was again dominant.The Neo-Confucians, as well as most of the various “reform” factions,were typically based on careers in one or another portion of these educationalorganizations. Chang Tsai and Shao Yung had their own schools, which werecarried on after their deaths by disciples. Ch’eng I, despite his qualification foroffice, nevertheless spent most of his life as a private teacher. In the SouthernSung, Chu Hsi had his famous White Deer Hollow Academy in the middleYangtze valley; his rival Lu Chiu-Yüan was a professor at the national university,but visited the private academies for debates. Neo-Confucians declaredthat education should occur not merely for the utilitarian purpose of passingthe examinations but for moral development. But though they often preachedholding oneself aloof from examinations, most of the Neo-Confucian leadershad passed the chin-shih degree; they were recruited from the elite of theeducational competition, not from its failures. Their theme arose by oppositionto prevailing conditions in the literati class. Materially the very existence of304 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathstheir schools depended on the intensified demand. Organizational expansionof the means of intellectual production created the conditions under whichautonomous intellectual networks could take off.Doubtless these same conditions were involved in the upsurge of manyother forms of cultural innovation during these centuries. The Sung dynastyexperienced a sudden outpouring of work in science, archaeology, and mathematics(Needham, 1956: 493–495; 1959: 38–51). Beginning around 1030 andcontinuing into the 1300s, there was a stream of scientists producing researchand reasoned compilations in biology, astronomy, fossil records, medicine,agriculture, and mathematics, as well as critical historical scholars who attackedapocryphal books and established careful editions of old records. Allthe contending factions of Sung political-intellectual life seem to have beeninvolved in this scientific and rational-scholarly movement. Although Neo-Confucian politics was archaizing, and the movement’s religious wings borderedon the mystical, nevertheless many of its leaders supported empiricalscience. Ssu-ma Kuang, the minister who undid the Wang An-shih reformswhich had put science into the examinations, was himself a historical scholar,he agreed with the slogan of Ch’eng I that knowledge derives from the investigationof things: “Every blade of grass possesses principle and should beexamined.” This ambiguous statement might be taken as advocacy of scientificinduction, or as a doctrine of knowledge as a flash of insight resulting fromBuddhist-like meditation. Chu Hsi, who promoted both empirical science(especially geology) and spiritual exercises, shows a similar combination.The Neo-Confucian movement drew on diverse cultural capitals; its longtermsuccess came from working out a synthesis that appealed to variousintellectual and career interests within the gentry class. Its opposition to theexamination system was not to last, and eventually its own works took overthe curriculum. But the initial opposition was crucial for shaping its innovations.At a time when the examination system was in flux and contendingfactions disputed its content, Neo-Confucianism outflanked the narrower positionsby uniting key elements of the scholarly world with some of the mainappeals of the non-Confucian religions.The Decline of Elite Buddhism and TaoismTo understand why the Neo-Confucians were philosophically creative and notmerely reactionary, we must see them as appropriating a religious space thatbecame open at this time. Colonization of this niche distinguished them fromother movements among the gentry on both the reform and conservative sides.They remained Confucians by adhering to their core strategy, the claim by literation government positions; within this stance, the Neo-Confucians reshapedRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 305the content of literati culture. The traditional ritualism and particularisticdeities whose worship the Confucians supported as forms but not as beliefshad fallen into low repute among the Sung gentry (Gernet, 1962). Ch’anBuddhism, which once had considerable prestige in this social class, wasdeclining institutionally. The elite monasteries had suffered from confiscationand government regulation; the Buddhism that survived was primarily a popularreligion supported by the lower classes.Reverting to the policy of weakness, some of the last Buddhists of anyintellectual note developed syncretisms with Taoism and Confucianism (see, inFigure 6.4, 295 and notably 310, the last representative of a failing Ch’anlineage). On their side Taoism moved closer to Buddhism. No longer were theyinstigating persecution and confiscation against Buddhist rivals. During theSung, popular Taoism underwent several reform movements; one sect claimedto be a synthesis of “the three doctrines,” although it was most similar toBuddhism in its stress on ascetic control over desires and especially sexuality,to ensure rebirth in heaven among the Immortals (Gernet, 1962: 214–215;Welch, 1965: 145–148). Another Taoist reform sect allowed priests to marryand to live without monasteries. Taoist priesthood became a hereditary status,carried along by practitioners of ordinary petty occupations, supplemented bymaking and selling talismans and performing magic.After Neo-Confucianism emerged, Taoism was abandoned by the upperclass. Its popular divinities overlapped increasingly with those of the Buddhists;eventually Taoist monks were welcomed in Buddhist monasteries and vice versa(Welch, 1965: 146, 156–157). This was a syncretism of weakness at a timewhen the political fortunes of both religions had sunk. By the Ming, the oncecontentious Buddhist sects had amalgamated into a common set of doctrinesand practices, combining a version of Ch’an meditation with the nembutsuinvocations of the Amidaists (Dumoulin, 1988: 286). As sophisticated intellectualscomparable to the educated gentry disappeared among the Buddhists andTaoists, the dominant Neo-Confucians were scornful of popular religion.The collapse of elite Buddhism and Taoism left their intellectual capital upfor grabs. Those conservative Confucians who moved into this open spacebecame the “Neo-Confucian” movement. Their successful tactic was to borrowelements of occultism and spiritual cultivation from Taoists and Buddhistswhile tying it to the core gentry concern for official careers. The official wasredefined as the sage, and sagehood as the Confucian equivalent of Buddhistenlightenment.The Struggle for a Neo-Confucian ReligionSung Neo-Confucianism was created by men who connected personally withTaoist and Buddhist philosophers while criticizing and modifying their doc-306 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathstrines. Shao Yung developed his cosmology from a chain of Taoist numerologists,interpreters of diagrams based on the Yi Ching, going back to the TaoistCh’en T’uan around 950. Chou Tun-I had studied with various Buddhists andTaoists, including five Ch’an masters, although none of these were significantenough to appear in our lineage charts (Dumoulin, 1988: 268). The Ch’engbrothers were students of both Shao Yung and Chou Tun-I, and Ch’eng Haofollowed up by seeking out Buddhist and Taoist teachers for a number of yearsbefore he and his brother formulated their own position. The doctrinal connectionto Taoism was so close that the works of Shao Yung, Chou Tun-I, andLiu Mu (303 in Figure 6.4, another offshoot of the Ch’en Tu’an lineage whichled up to Chou Tun-I) ended up being included in later centuries in the Taoistcollection (Graham, 1958: 159). Later generations of neo-Confucians continuedtheir religious contacts. Ch’eng I carried on an interchange with a memberof the Lin-Chi Ch’an lineage, as did several of his immediate disciples (see 347,348, 327, and 328 in Figure 6.4; also in the next generation the connection of335 to the leading disciple of the Ch’eng brothers, Yang Shih). Still later ChuHsi studied with Buddhists and Taoists, and in his maturity contacted importantCh’an masters, including their last famous figure, Ta-hui, while Chu Hsi’srival Lu Chiu-Yüan also had contacts in the same Ch’an lineage (354).How to relate to this Buddhist and Taoist material was the point ofcontention which generated the creativity within Neo-Confucianism. ShaoYung attacked the heaven cult of orthodox Confucian religion. His cosmologywas a form of occult divination, based on a new interpretation of the YiChing hexagrams, rearranging them into an evolutionary sequence. He laid thegroundwork for a new cosmology, declaring that mind, tranquil and enlightened,is the Great Ultimate at the basis of the physical universe (Chan, 1963:493); on the material level, the cosmos is governed by numerical progressionsand goes through great cycles of creation and destruction, rather like Buddhistkalpas. Shao Yung’s reputation was primarily as a prophet, and his followersconstituted a school separate from the emerging main line of Neo-Confucians.Polemical battles were fought between these camps at the time of Yang Shih(the early 1100s).Another faction contending for religious reform, though less well organizedas a lineage, was that of Chou Tun-I, who advocated as instruments ofgovernment divinations by the Yi Ching hexagrams and by evocation of spirits.His technical philosophy took the form of a Taoist-like diagram describingcosmic evolution as a series of emanations from the Supreme Ultimate (T’aiChi), through yin and yang, to the Five Agents, the hexagrams of the Yi Ching,and finally to man as a spiritual being. Chou Tun-I’s position is a syncretismof all the various divination schools. He was retrospectively elevated amongthe five great founders, but his works were little known in the 1000s. TheCh’eng brothers, who had studied with him before going on to Buddhist andRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 307Taoist masters, rarely referred to him substantively, and called him disparagingly(and somewhat inaccurately) “poor Zen brother.” Chou Tun-I’s branchof occultist cosmology, centered on the Supreme Ultimate, was quite differentfrom the more rationalist position of the Ch’eng brothers, based on li (principle)and lacking the diagrams which were so central to Chou Tun-I (Graham,1958: 160–166; Chang, 1957–1962).In addition to the two occultist wings represented by Shao Yung and ChouTun-I, there was a third lineage of Chang Tsai and his followers. He toodeveloped a cosmology based on the Yi Ching appendices. But Chang Tsaimoved farther away from occultism, rejecting spirits of the dead and giving amore naturalistic interpretation of the universe. He identified the SupremeUltimate with ch’i, (matter/energy), which produces all things by differentstates of dispersion and condensation. This enabled him to dismiss Buddhistvoid and Taoist non-being as a mistaken view of ch’i in a state of extremedispersion. Chang Tsai’s own religious theme came in the form of pantheism:since ch’i is everywhere, it makes up one’s own mind and body, which are akinto the rest of the universe. He extended Confucian universal love from humanityto the entire universe, and implied that human sincerity upholds the naturalas well as the social order. At the same time, since ch’i is everywhere, one ismistaken in trying to escape from the world, as the Buddhists do; the sagesimply lives a normal life, attuned to the universe. Chang Tsai carved out astance combining religious sensitivity with a rationalist philosophy; he attackedboth the occultists and the archaizing of the orthodox Confucians. It wasprobably Chang Tsai who began the Neo-Confucian practice of meditationaimed at the goal of attaining “sagehood,” which the Neo-Confucians carefullydistinguished from Buddhism and Taoism by interpreting the result not as astate of self-absorption or immortality-seeking but as an ethical condition.The Ch’eng brothers were personally connected with all three of theseintellectual factions, and they made the most abstract philosophical advancesand had the most successful lineage of followers. They were quite selective inwhich predecessors they endorsed. They avoided mentioning the ideas of ChouTun-I, though he was their neighbor and friend, and never referred to theSupreme Ultimate; conversely, Chou Tun-I never used the Ch’engs’ favoriteconcept, li, or principle (Graham, 1958: 158). The Ch’engs also militantlycriticized all Confucians since Mencius, rejecting alike Tung Chung-shu’s occultism,Yang Hsiung’s naturalism, and even Han Yü’s effort to create aConfucian sage religion during the late T’ang. The Ch’engs alone claimed tobe restoring the ancient sage wisdom. They rejected contemporary occultismas well, and especially disliked the Yi Ching and its appendices as mysticalspeculation (Graham, 1958: 143, 162). Among their contemporaries the onlyones they praised as not “deluded by false doctrines” were Shao Yung, their308 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsuncle Chang Tsai, and the scientist-statesman Ssu-ma Kuang. The Ch’engbrothers’ contacts, even with the positions they rejected, shaped their creativityby opposition. It was because of their central position amidst the antagonismsand opportunities of the field that they came to forge the most successfulphilosophy.Ch’eng Hao gave an especially moralistic emphasis to his philosophy,tending to anthropomorphize nature as having a mind, and animated by thebasic Confucian virtue of jen, humanity. His main philosophical contributionwas to add another level of abstraction besides ch’i, the basic substance: thereis also li, principle, which underlies both natural and moral phenomena.Ch’eng I, the most original thinker of the group, developed a cosmologicalmodel in which new ch’i is continuously created as old ch’i is burned up: “Theuniverse is a vast furnace.” Physical and mental are aspects of the same thing,while abstract principle (li) governs the whole. “A thing is an event. If theprinciples underlying the event are investigated to the utmost, then all principleswill be understood.” “Principle is one but its manifestations are many.”Graham (1958: xix) calls Ch’eng I “the greatest Confucian thinker of thelast two thousand years.” If we are concerned with the higher levels of abstractphilosophy, we could extend this judgment all the way back to the beginning.The Chinese themselves made a cult of the pre-Han thinkers, and cast themselvesin the role of mere commentators. Modern historians have been willingto see later Confucians as nothing but footnotes to a fixed body of ideas. Inreality, Confucius, Mencius, and Chuang Tzu are not in the same league withthe later philosophers at constructing sophisticated arguments for clearly recognizedmetaphysical conceptions. Long cumulation across intellectual generationsopens new realms of creativity which are beyond the purview of earlygenerations.Test Case: An Abortive Confucian Sage Religion in the Late T’angIf the sociological explanation of Sung Neo-Confucianism is correct, similarconditions should have been involved in an episode in the late T’ang in whicha similar doctrine appeared. Sung Neo-Confucianism developed among thefactions contending for political control in a government dominated by scholars.The expanding examination system provided the material basis for intellectualmovements as burgeoning numbers of students opened up careers forteachers and led to the founding of numerous private schools. Competitionbecame severe for the small number of government positions at the end of theeducational sequence, building up dissatisfaction and fostering proposals forcurricular reform. Educational factions split over revising, reinterpreting, orreplacing the classics on which the examinations were based, and over the issueRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 309of utilitarian versus literary cultivation. The lines of these scholarly networksthat became Neo-Confucianism consisted of those rebelling against the statusquo in the name of traditional Confucian appeals to the moral superiority ofthe classic past. This could be given a novel philosophical content by appropriatingfrom the Buddhists the religious ideal of the enlightened sage, anoption that was structurally available because the social base of Buddhism wascrumbling.The same conditions—political struggle rooted in reformers of the examinationsystem, together with Confucian traditionalists appropriating Buddhistreligious space—had appeared in the late T’ang but with different intensities.Han Yü and Li Ao, both T’ang officials and professors at the national university,around 800–820 had ineffectually attacked government support of Buddhism,especially its ritual displays of magic. At the same time they borrowedelements of Buddhist philosophy, claiming that Confucianism gave a transcendentcosmological vision as well as rules of social conduct. In imitation of theBuddhist lineages, Han Yü and Li Ao invented a transmission of an innerConfucian truth from the mythical sages Yao and Shun through the duke ofChou, Confucius, and Mencius. Thereafter, they claimed, the transmission wasinterrupted by the mundane Confucianism of Hsün Tzu and Yang Hsiung,until Han Yü himself restored the lineage.10 Li Ao claimed that he had personallyrecovered the key insight, apparently a Buddhist-style meditative experiencerevealing the nature of the universe. This stance of opposing Buddhismwhile borrowing from it in order to set up a rival Confucian cosmology andmysticism is structurally parallel to the Neo-Confucian movement seven oreight generations later.There are a number of similarities in background conditions. The laterT’ang was undergoing a period of political and economic reconstruction afterthe severe disruptions of the An Lu-shan rebellion and civil war during 755–762. In addition to the usual power struggles of military governors and palaceeunuchs, scholar-officials were active in proposing ideologically oriented reforms(Pulleybank, 1960). There was an archaizing faction attempting to bringback the arrangements of the ancient Chou dynasty, and a reform party whichwished to dispense with tradition and streamline administration of the economyand tax system. The former resembles the archaizing pronouncements ofthe Sung Neo-Confucians, while the latter is a forerunner of the Wang An-shihreformers. The political movements were connected to intellectual groupingsamong the scholars. Most notable among these were the ku-wen movement inliterary style, which rejected current formalisms and returned to the simplerprose of classical times, and a critical movement which demystified the classicaltexts by putting them in their historical context and rejected them as guides tocurrent policy.310 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThese scholarly movements were rooted in the increasing focus on formalcivil service examinations. From beginnings early in the dynasty, these had firstbecome important around 700; although the size of the examination systemwas small compared to the Sung, by the late 700s it had become an importantroute for recruiting high-ranking officials, and there were large numbers ofunsuccessful degree candidates (Pulleybank, 1960: 104; CHC, 1979: 179,213–215, 274–277, 329–330). There were similar criticisms and struggles asin the Sung: some wanted expansion of the system to ease the competitiveness;others criticized the inflexibility of examination-based recruitment and theremoteness of its cultural content from current reality.Han Yü was in the midst of the networks linking all of these factions. Hisideological predecessors were the ku-wen literary reformers, whose classicalemphasis Han Yü expressed as a Confucian ideal of moral regenerationthrough the return to tradition. Some of his colleagues in the ku-wen movementhad already expressed the idea of an esoteric Confucian lineage of sages, andHan Yü may be the only figure who reaped public fame from the ideas of thegroup (Pulleybank, 1960: 97, 112). Han Yü’s special advantage was his wideconnections to the most creative poets and writers of the time. His father wasallied with one of the most famous poets in Chinese history, Li Po (699–762);his older brother was connected to the founders of the ku-wen movement. HanYü himself became a notable poet, participating in a network of other importantpoets, and acquired the stature of one of the classic prose stylists.The various reform movements came to a head around the turn of thecentury. The literary reformers were allied for a time with the political andeconomic reformers, an oppositional group centered on the Crown Prince fromabout 785 until it briefly acceded to power in 805. Here again there is an aptparallel to Wang An-shih’s movement in the Sung, with its roots in the poetsand classical scholars of the previous generation. In the T’ang case, everythingaborted; not only were the economic reformers thrown out of power byfactions of palace eunuchs and the military, but also the proto–Neo-Confucianismof Han Yü and the ku-wen movement soon petered out. The strugglesamong the intellectual factions did not line up the same way in both instances.The Sung Neo-Confucians were strongly opposed to the poets, while in theT’ang both were united in pressing for reform of the examination content.11And the split between cultural conservatives and institutional modernizers,although latent in the T’ang groupings, never came to the sharp break thatcharacterized the Sung controversies.The main line of opposition was between the most extreme claims of theConfucian movement and the Buddhists, but this became acute only when HanYü began his famous polemics around 805–820. The Confucian sage religionwas appropriating cultural capital from the Buddhists, and this was shaped inRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 311the preceding years by personal links. In the T’ang, both the literary reformersand the Crown Prince’s practical reformers were linked to Buddhist intellectuals,in this case from the T’ien-t’ai sect rather than, as in the Sung, from theCh’an. Buddhist dominance in philosophy, although wavering with the politicalwinds, was still based on strong material supports. Against a history ofsuccessive persecutions of Buddhism during the past century, Han Yü musthave felt some grounds for confidence in attacking the magical tantrism popularat the court. But although court Buddhism was on its last legs, Buddhismas a whole was still in its last wave of creativity. Ch’an Buddhism was expandingand victoriously fractionating in the rural monasteries. Only after this basetoo was reduced would the Confucian sage religion successfully appropriatethe Buddhist space. The T’ang flurry of proto–Neo-Confucianism arose fromconditions approximating the first generation of the Sung movement, religiousand philosophical innovations comparable to those of Chang Tsai or ChouTun-I. Neither examination system expansion nor Buddhist collapse was extensiveenough yet to allow the movement to go on to constructive second andsubsequent generations comparable to the Ch’eng brothers and their followers.The Emergence of Neo-Confucian Metaphysical SystemsThe Sung Neo-Confucian movement, in keeping with the law of small numbers,expanded into an open intellectual space not as a single position but as a setof rivals. For the first two or three generations there were four main contenders:the occultism of Shao Yung and of Chou Tun-I, the naturalist school of ChangTsai, and the followers of the Ch’eng brothers. Controversies and alliancesamong these groups provided the intellectual activity after the death of thefounders. The numerologists of the Shao school in particular were strong rivalsof the Ch’eng disciples down to around 1150, while another faction, the Huschool (337 to 342 in Figure 6.4) kept up a branch independent of the mainCh’eng lineage which centered on Yang Shih.12All these lines came together around 1170–1200 with Chu Hsi, whoproduced an encyclopedic commentary on and synthesis of his predecessors.Chu Hsi’s system combines the most disparate branches by identifying ChouTun-I’s Supreme Ultimate with li, or principle. Chu Hsi brought out clearly thedualism between principle (li) and matter/energy, (ch’i) and explored the implicationsof his metaphysical synthesis. Chu Hsi continued much of theNeo-Confucian religious emphasis, including the practice of sitting in meditationto achieve sagehood. By seeing the li in things, one achieves “suddenenlightenment”—a term borrowed from Ch’an Buddhism. But Chu Hsi waspredominantly naturalistic. He criticized divination and disbelieved in life afterdeath and visitations of ghosts and spirits, reiterating the secularist side of312 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsConfucianism, which had been in existence among critical scholars since thelater Han. Chu Hsi incorporated much contemporary natural science andhistorical scholarship into his system, including his own theory of the evolutionof the universe from vortices, and giving a paleontologically correct explanationof fossils. At the same time, he incorporated a good deal of alchemy andthe hexagram system of the Yi Ching, which had been repudiated by Ch’engI. In his systematic arrangement and philosophical comprehensiveness, ChuHsi resembles Thomas Aquinas, while his contents are more like those ofAlbertus Magnus. More than his predecessors, Chu Hsi gives an explicitmetaphysical emphasis, recognizing the difference between logical and factualpriority in his discussion of li and ch’i, principle and energy/matter. In thisrespect, Chu Hsi reaches a degree of reflexive awareness about abstractionscomparable to Plato and Aristotle.Chu Hsi split this new attention space with a rival. Lu Chiu-Yüan putforward the doctrine that li as well as time and space are entirely within theexperiencing mind. This radical idealism was a new departure for Confucianism;hitherto its idealist tendencies had gone only to the extent of emphasizingthe moral unity of humanity with the universe, or positing a metaphoricalemanation of the hexagrams from an ultimate mind. Lu was a popular teacherin his day, and debated personally with Chu Hsi over whether mind is itselfprinciple (Lu’s position), or whether human nature more restrictedly is theprinciple which gives rise to mind (Chu’s position). For Chu, the SupremeUltimate is above physical form and yin-yang is within physical form, whereasLu refused the distinction. The two most abstract metaphysical systems to datein Chinese philosophy (outside of Buddhism) emerged together, mutually constitutingeach other by opposition.The synthetic branch of Neo-Confucianism combining the Ch’eng brotherswith Chu Hsi (called Ch’eng-Chu Neo-Confucianism) eventually won officialdominance, becoming adopted as the required curriculum for the examinationsystem. Thereafter Neo-Confucianism became just the kind of scholasticism ithad begun by criticizing. Neo-Confucianism dominated because it broughttogether all the main social interests of the literati: the investment of Confuciancultural capital in the examinations, but also frustration with the bureaucraticexamination competition; the status appeal of spiritual cultivation, but also ofscholarly and scientific exploration; and a generally conservative stance oneconomic changes which might challenge gentry dominance. As the radicaleconomic reformers faded out, the Neo-Confucians usurped the central positionfrom the narrower Confucian traditionalists.Like Confucians generally throughout Chinese history, the Neo-Confucianswere creative only when they were in opposition; even then they always stoodat the door of official power, drawing creative energy from the prospects ofRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 313victory which lay within their reach. The pattern of opposition was repeatedthree times. Typically opposition starts off when a partisan political strugglebecomes entwined with an intellectual issue. The first round of creativitycrystallized against the Wang An-shih economic reforms and their aftermath.The resolution of the political conflict eventually de-energized the intellectualcreativity. The ban on the Ch’eng brothers’ writings, imposed intermittentlyearly in the 1100s, was lifted in 1155 as the Southern Sung governmentabandoned efforts at structural reform.The second wave of Neo-Confucian creativity was connected to a newpartisan issue, military policy toward the Jürchen state in the north. Chu Hsiand his father (an important government official) were in a faction thatfavored military reconquest of the north against dominant government policythat was pacifist out of fear of losing civilian control. Chu Hsi several timesrose to high position, including vice minister of the army, but was repeatedlydemoted and dismissed for his attacks on other officials. Chu Hsi’s teachingswere banned in 1196 because of his political subversiveness. By 1237 the issueof northern reconquest was moot, for the Mongols had taken the north andwere pressing the attack on the south. Neo-Confucianism was adopted asofficial state doctrine; henceforth examinations were based on Chu Hsi’s editionsof and commentaries on the classics. The downfall of the Southern Sungto the Mongols in 1279 temporarily eliminated this privileged position; butwhen the examination system was reinstituted in 1313, Neo-Confucianism ofthe Ch’eng-Chu school again became official. The Ch’eng brothers, ChouTun-I, Chang Tsai, and other Sung Neo-Confucians were awarded state sacrificesin Confucian temples (Chan, 1970: 43); the religious radicalism borrowedfrom the Buddhists had been absorbed back into the official cult.Thereafter the Neo-Confucians remained ritually and intellectually dominantfor almost 20 generations, down to the abolition of the Confucian examinationsin 1905. After Chu Hsi’s death, there were no notable philosophers for300 years.The third wave of creativity again follows the pattern: political factionalismconnected with a movement of intellectuals dissatisfied with the pressures ofthe examination system; the philosophical doctrine taking the form of a religioussyncretism put forward as a new cultural standard for choosing officials.The last great philosopher, Wang Yang-ming (Wang Shou-jen, 1472–1529),represents a split in what had now become the Neo-Confucian orthodoxy ofthe Ch’eng-Chu school (see Figure 6.5). Politically, Wang Yang-ming wasinvolved in factional disputes, taking the rather typical stance of a Confucianofficial against the power of court eunuchs, and also advocating decentralizationof military commands, thereby raising fears at court over losing civiliancontrol (Tu, 1976). His career fluctuated between political and military tri-314 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsumphs and denunciation and punishment. During a period of banishment,he experienced “enlightenment” while meditating on the nature of bamboo;again this is a syncretism with Buddhism and Taoism, although subordinatingmeditation and immortality-seeking to an intellectual insight with politicalovertones. Reinterpreting Chu Hsi’s “investigation of things” as an inner ratherthan an outward process, Wang held that the world is produced by the thoughtof a world spirit, identical with the thoughts of all people collectively. Wang’sidealism supported the conclusion that everyone has the same innate moralintuitions, and everyone could potentially become a sage by uncovering theoriginal mind from the obstacles of selfish desires: “The streets are full ofsages.”Wang Yang-ming’s doctrine constituted an egalitarian attack on the ladderof examinations, which had grown even longer and more formalized in theMing than in the Sung. The earlier two-level system of local and metropolitanexaminations was complicated still further into three levels with the additionof a provincial examination and subdivision of the first, prefectural examinationinto three consecutive steps (Chaffee, 1985: 23, 183). Competition hadbecome enormous, in part because alternative routes to office were closed, asa huge number of candidates struggled for a tiny set of positions. Like previousFIGURE 6.5. NEO-CONFUCIAN ORTHODOXY AND THE IDEALISTMOVEMENT, 1435–1565Revolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 315waves of oppositional Neo-Confucians, Wang and his followers attacked thestandard of literary compositions and rote memorization. Wang drew theinference from his philosophy that knowledge is identical with action; this wasturned into an attack on scholasticism: “Learning before they can act, theynever get to the end of it” (Chan, 1963: 678). Yet although Wang held thatthe grind of examination study was incompatible with sagehood, he regardedit as a necessary step for an official career, which would allow one to put one’sideals into action (Tu, 1976: 131). Wang’s idealism constitutes not so much acosmology as a pragmatism identifying moral ideals with the process of puttingthem into effect. His philosophy glorifies intellectual activity outside the examinationlife, since truly experiencing moral ideas is already a form of action;it also exalts action, thereby legitimating politics. Again opposition shapes theline along which creativity emerges. Since the official philosophy tended towarda secular and materialist rationalism, Wang Yang-ming turned toward subjectivityand intuition.Wang Yang-ming’s disciples became a quasi-religious movement, makinghis philosophy the most popular in China during the next century. While theCh’eng-Chu rationalist Neo-Confucians remained dominant in the officialexamination system, Wang Yang-ming’s idealist pragmatism was supported byan underground, including secret societies gathered for political as well asspiritual purposes. During the generation of Wang Yang-ming’s immediatefollowers, there continued to be philosophical developments, following thefamiliar path of splits into rival schools after his death. As the movementbecame absorbed into politics, lay concerns again prevailed, and intellectualcreativity along this line came to an end. We will not follow the furtherdevelopments of Chinese philosophy, including the repudiation of Neo-Confucianmetaphysics in the late 1600s and 1700s, which shifted intellectual activitytoward materialism and historical scholarship in a purely secular vein.The Weak Continuity of Chinese MetaphysicsThe idealism formulated by Lu Chiu-Yüan and Wang Yang-ming is an unusualdevelopment within Chinese philosophy; the only truly comparable instance isthe Consciousness-Only doctrine of the mid-T’ang, a Buddhist philosophyinsulated from non-Buddhist thought. This absence of idealism is connectedmore with the halting continuity of philosophical abstraction than with adeep-rooted cultural trait. Idealism is never an early form but a sophisticatedphilosophical construction. A halfway house between revealed religion andrationalistic philosophy, idealism is couched at a level of abstraction which canbe attained only through a long cumulative development of an intellectualnetwork refining its concepts. The heyday of idealist philosophies in the Greek316 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsworld was in late antiquity;13 in India, Buddhist Yogacara and Hindu AdvaitaVendanta arose well into the medieval period; in Europe the great idealistsystems spanned the 1780s to the 1920s, building on the technical tools ofearlier generations. This idealist halfway house can be approached from severaldirections. The bases of European idealism were religious universities on thepath to secularization; in Greece the idealists were generally moving in theother direction. The Sung and Ming idealisms emerged in competition withmetaphysical systems dividing the intellectual field, sharing out the ingredientsof rationalistic philosophy and of religious transcendence that were available.Idealism is of course not the only form of metaphysical abstraction. Wecan draw the lesson more generally. It is often asserted that the Chinesementality is concrete and practical, with no taste for metaphysics. Yet metaphysicalabstractions were periodically created in China. It is true that earlypositions are only ambiguously metaphysical. The Tao Te Ching and theChuang Tzu are skewed toward ethics, in the sense of how one should behaveand not behave rather than indicating what exists at higher levels of reflection.The Tao Te Ching is skeptical rather than constructive; yet its skepticism aboutwhat is nameable is the tool by which it develops its metaphysical implications.And this is characteristic of metaphysics in general. Higher levels of abstractreflection are reached by applying epistemological considerations to conceptualproblems. At least this is one route toward metaphysics, prominent in Greek,Indian, and European philosophy. The issue in China is less the absence ofmetaphysics than the rarity of sustained epistemological consideration.Epistemology becomes a focus when an intellectual community is balancedin debate, with sufficient continuity across the generations to give rise tospecialization in the techniques of argument. Sophistical debate is a typical firststep toward consideration of epistemology in its own right. Density of thenetwork structure in the time of the ancient Chi-hsia Academy and rival centersproduced a sophistical epistemology countered by positive assertions about theconditions of knowledge, themes similar to what emerged in Greece undercomparable conditions. In both cases a variety of positions divided the intellectualfield. Metaphysical and epistemological strands in Mencius and HuiShih were the setting in which Chuang Tzu created his oppositional stance.Over the next generations, the opposing epistemologies of the Mohist Canonsand of Kung-sun Lung became the backdrop against which the Tao Te Chingcould proclaim its negative metaphysics. When the destruction of intellectualnetworks interrupted further development on the abstract level, philosophicaldoctrines during the Han were carried on at a level closer to lay concerns.When structural conditions were again favorable to skeptical and sophisticaldebate, in the brief generations of the Pure Conversation circles of the ThreeKingdoms, abstract philosophy emerged again. The earlier cultural capital wasRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 317not only revived but, at the hands of Wang Pi, Kuo Hsiang, and others, pushedin the direction of both epistemology and metaphysics.Epistemological debate is not the only route to metaphysics. We have seenin India how a religion based on world-fleeing ascetic meditation anchored askeptical stance toward the reality of the ordinary world. This encouragedintellectual networks to push to higher levels of metaphysical abstraction: inpart because independence of the core elite of meditators from lay-orientedrituals and ethical preaching led to a focus on pure insight as the mark ofreligious standing; in part because tension within the sacred concepts of thetranscendental and the aconceptual provided just the kind of deep troubles thatmotivate layers of reflexive refinement. Transplanted to China, these conditionsfostered further philosophical creativity, reaching its metaphysical high pointwith the Hua-yen synthesis of all the Buddhist schools. Here metaphysicalconstruction literally packed abstraction back into abstraction, taking pains toincorporate all viewpoints of the intellectual-religious field into a unified system.To do so, the Hua-yen philosophers had to push through the particularitiesof religious sacred objects and discover the mutual constitution not onlyof different abstractions by one another, but also the interdependence ofdifferent levels of abstraction. In demonstrating the interpenetration of changeand emptiness, concepts and phenomenal objects, Hua-yen may well be themost significant Chinese contributor to world philosophy.In this light, the most important institutional fact shaping the medieval andsubsequent development of Chinese philosophy was the insulation between theBuddhist scholastics and the Confucian gentry. During the period when thegreat constructive Buddhist systems were prominent, Confucianism was far toomuch on the defensive religiously, organizationally, and intellectually to profitfrom them even at the level of creative opposition. When Buddhist and Confuciannetwork contacts and intellectual syntheses finally became significant,the material base of intellectual Buddhism had long since collapsed. TheBuddhist contacts of the Sung Neo-Confucians were confined to the Ch’anmasters. But Ch’an was, on the surface, a predominantly anti-intellectualmovement, and what the Neo-Confucians took from it was a meditation-orientedtechnique that they could transmute into their own Sage religion, butlittle in the way of refined metaphysical concepts.14Neo-Confucian metaphysics started over again from a relatively lower levelof philosophical abstraction than the Buddhists had attained. The early generationof Sung Neo-Confucians picked up the cultural capital of the olddivination schools; and this had been transmitted largely on a concrete levelthrough lay-oriented practitioners. There is a temptation to regard this emphasison a system of continuous worldly change as the archetypal Chineseworldview; certainly it is an attractively realistic vision, if regarded on a suf-318 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsficient level of generality. But it is hardly an aboriginal or eternal item ofChinese culture. Its classic statement, the appendices to the Yi Ching addedduring the Ch’in or early Han, was produced at the very end of ancient Chinesephilosophy. This remained a set of particularistic portents, and was raised onlyephemerally to the level of a general assertion of a universe of change, in theshort-lived movement of philosophers at the time of the Dark Learning. Thereafter,once again the metaphysics was slighted until the classic texts becamematerials for the Neo-Confucian networks.From here quite different intellectual paths were possible. By abstractingfrom their use as a magical practice, the Yi Ching hexagrams could be turnedinto a proto-science. In this direction, the emphasis was no longer on thereality of change but on the underlying elements which in combination generatethe empirical world. It became something like a chemistry, equivalent tothe element theories of the Presocratic Greeks which led in the direction ofatomism. And indeed Sung Neo-Confucianism developed in connection withan upsurge in physical science. When the hexagram sequences were assertedas governing empirical events, they became the content of an empirical science,but a scientific theory whose elements are fixed without the refinements ofobservation and experiment. The Neo-Confucian thinkers were often betterscientists than this; Chu Hsi in particular includes a level of concrete investigationwhich involves some accumulation of empirical information.Yet as philosophy this kind of proto-science is a bringdown from the pathof metaphysical creativity. To be sure, science and metaphysics are not mutuallyexclusive; the Sung experience fits with abundant evidence from Greece, Islam,and Europe that creativity can take place on both fronts in the same generations,and sometimes by the same individuals. Ch’eng I’s vision of the universeas a vast furnace, continuously burning up matter/energy while creating itanew, is more appealing as an abstract cosmology than as a scientific theory.In Chu Hsi, the metaphysical payoff seems comparatively banal; the realm ofprinciple existing within things gives us a doctrine supportive of scientificinvestigation, but not much of a exploration of constructive metaphysics.The episodes of idealism with Lu Chiu-Yüan and Wang Yang-ming showthat there was more to be poured from that pot. But the creative networkswere broken off, leaving no sustained intellectual argument to carry philosophyonward in its own right. With Sung Neo-Confucianism, Chinese philosophyhad traversed, in bursts interspersed with long periods of lay-oriented ideologies,a range of abstract philosophical development equivalent to that of theGreeks from the early Presocratics up through approximately the generationof Plato or a little later, the predominant Chinese position resembling Stoicismwithout its technical logic. Why were there such long periods of stagnation,even retrogression, on the plane of abstract philosophy? It was not simply aRevolutions: Buddhist and Neo-Confucian China • 319matter of declining material supports for intellectual life; the fall of the greatdynasties with their material wealth is correlated not with philosophical mediocritybut often with the opposite. The Han, T’ang, and Ming were periodswhen the stagnation of abstract philosophy, at least outside of Buddhism, wasat its worst.Here we see the importance not of material supports for intellectual life ingeneral, but of the particular kinds of structural underpinnings which supportor stifle creativity. The deadening touch in all these stagnant dynasties wasprecisely the way Chinese intellectuals were controlled by material incentiveslinked to the selection of officials for the state. The Han Confucians workedsuccessfully to build the core of a Confucian bureaucracy, in the processbringing philosophy down to the level of rituals and portents, or at best ascholasticism of state librarians. The T’ang was the period when the formalexamination system took off; the Ming was the dynasty during which the statebecame permeated by exam-selected officials and the gentry spent virtuallytheir entire lives studying to pass through those narrow hoops. Once theexamination system took hold, the principal episodes of creativity among theConfucian gentry occurred when movements were mobilized to struggle againstthe artificialities of the examination life.We may state the lesson more generally. The stifling effect on philosophicalcreativity of the government examination system was paralleled by the deadeningeffects of requiring certificates of ordination for Buddhist and Taoistmonks. The policy of taxing and regulating these religions by governmentcertification, set in place during the later T’ang, was directly connected to theirdecline in intellectual creativity from that point on. Ch’an Buddhism escapedfor a while by evading regulation, but it too eventually succumbed. Again, itwas not a question of eliminating material foundations. The Buddhist andTaoist churches survived and even prospered in the Sung dynasty and later, butonly as religions of the lower classes; their upper layer of educated intellectualsalmost entirely disappeared. Within Ch’an itself, the period of its own creativemasters, with their paradoxical encounters and dramatic enlightenment experiences,was dried up in their own formal scholasticism. By the period of Ch’andecadence in the Sung, tales of the Ch’an masters of the T’ang were formalizedinto koan collections treated as texts for a series of exercises to be passed onthe way to higher monastic rank. The examination system of the Confuciansbecame paralleled by a similar set of formalities within Ch’an.We encounter here a major theme of the formal organization of education.Schooling, which we associate with the life of culture, often operates as adeadening of culture, preserving the ideas of the past at the expense of creativitywithin the present. The long-standing Athenian and Alexandrian schools, oncepast their founding generations, show a similar pattern of stagnation. In me-320 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsdieval Europe, too, the universities are a two-edged sword: centers of creativityduring their early periods, associated with a stagnant scholasticism after 1350.On the theoretical level, what we see in China is the causal dynamics ofmaterial base and inner intellectual networks. Creativity occurs when lineagesrecombine intellectual capital in their struggle to divide the attention space;such recombinations are set in motion at those times when the underlying baseshifts. Hence there is creativity at both the moment of expansion and ofcontraction. Ch’an Buddhism was the last wave of Chinese Buddhist creativity,occurring when the institutional base of government-supported monastic propertieswas collapsing under political pressure. Ch’an temporarily found a newbase, the self-supporting monastery in the countryside. The distinctive Ch’ansensibility was a militant anti-intellectualism, in keeping with its work-orientedsurroundings and in reaction against the textual studies and philosophizing ofcourt Buddhism. The initial burgeoning of the Ch’an movement was neverthelessphilosophically creative because it fostered competition among an expandingwave of masters, displaying their enlightenment while traveling among thenewly founded monasteries. Ch’an became an intellectual’s anti-intellectualism—indeed, epitomizing this stance forever after—because its several generationsof status competition built hyper-sophisticated layers of reflexivenessexpressing each new master’s detached superiority to the already sophisticatedsymbolic gestures of preceding masters.Ch’an was a movement of the institutional decline of Chinese Buddhism.When Ch’an too faded into routinization and its material base decayed, it lostits threat in the eyes of the Confucian literati. The Neo-Confucians intellectuallycannibalized their fading rival, just as in India the Advaita movement underShankara took over Buddhist omni-denial of substance when that religion wasdying. The creative edge of Neo-Confucianism rode on the growth of its neworganizational base, the rapid expansion of the government examination system;this is an obverse case to the initial wave of Ch’an creativity underorganizational crisis. There is some irony in the fact that Sung Neo-Confucianismbegan in the oppositional circles of elite degree holders who objected tothe vulgarization and routinization of the new educational ethos; but Neo-Confucianismeventually became adopted as the content of the examination systemitself once its creativity had faded to rote. For the sociology of institutions, thisirony is merely that of the dynamism of structures over time. Creativity comesfrom the moment of rearrangement; old creativity becomes new routine whenthe underlying bases stop moving. Later, in Japan, these same late Ch’anmonastic routines and Neo-Confucian academies would give off yet furtherwaves of innovation, as they became once again energized by new changes ofthe organizational base.