Conclusions to Part I:The Ingredients of Intellectual LifeFor a long time the West has regarded Asia as exotic. Even today in an ethosof tolerant multiculturalism, the stress is on non-Western cultures as uniquesensibilities running on distinctive inner logics. What we see in examining thedynamics of Asian intellectual networks is quite the contrary.We did not have to wait for the chapters on modern Western philosophyto meet the basic structures of intellectual life. The most important principlescome out in full clarity in Asian histories, once we remove the lenses tintedwith static primordiality that have kept most of us, Westerners and Asiansalike, from seeing just how full of conflict and change these histories have been.Asian history shows us the basic ingredients of all of world history. A summaryof the sociology of Asian intellectual life is a convenient summary of the centraltheory of this book.First: Intellectual creativity is concentrated in chains of personal contacts,passing emotional energy and cultural capital from generation to generation.This structure underwrites all manner of contents: we see it in the chains ofpopular evangelists in Pure Land Buddhism, as among the masters of Zen,among Indian logicians and Japanese Neo-Confucians.Second: Creativity moves by oppositions. Comparably important philosophersappear contemporaneously, their rivalry underpinning one another’sfame. Chains of oppositions create the inner content of philosophies; new ideasunfold by negating the major points of rival positions on a shared topic ofargument and a common level of abstraction. The dance of counterpoint isplayed over again as levels of abstraction shift, whether toward greater reflexivityor toward greater concreteness and reification. Not zeitgeist but structuredrivalries constitute the successive moments of intellectual history.Third: The emotional energy of creativity is concentrated at the center ofnetworks, in circles of persons encountering one another face to face. The hot379periods of intellectual life, those tumultuous golden ages of simultaneousinnovations, occur when several rival circles intersect at a few metropoles ofintellectual attention and debate. The ancient Chinese philosophers circulatingamong the four great centers of court patronage in the late Warring States; orthe mahavihara at Nalanda where all the Buddhist sects debated and Hinduthinkers joined in cosmopolitan shifts from camp to camp: these are archetypesfor Athens and Alexandria, Baghdad and Basra, Paris and Oxford, Weimarand Berlin, Trinity College Cambridge and Cambridge Massachusetts.Fourth: The law of small numbers sets upper and lower limits to theseoppositions. The number of contemporaneous creative schools successfullypropagating their ideas across the generations is between three and six, arecurrent pattern for focal nodes in intellectual attention space.Several corollaries follow. When external conditions enforce a single orthodoxy(as in the heavy hand of official bureaucracy in the Han dynasty, or againin the Ming examination system), creativity dries up; the stasis of Hinduphilosophy was constructed after Mogul and British conquests drove Hinduthinkers into a monolithic defensive coalition. At the upper end of the scale,when the law of small numbers is violated by too many rival positions, as inthe period of Upanishadic and heterodox sages at the time of the Buddha,skeptics attempt to reduce the cacophony by a stance of epistemological plagueon all houses, and synthesizers emerge who reduce the number of contendersby constructing systems.Fifth: The law of small numbers structures dynamics over time, connectingthe outer conditions of social conflict with the inner shifts in the networkswhich produce ideas. Causality is two-step. First, political and economicchanges bring ascendancy or decline of the material institutions which supportintellectuals; religions, monasteries, schools, publishing markets rise and fallwith these external forces. Intellectuals then readjust to fill the space availableto them under the law of small numbers. Expanding positions split into rivalphilosophies because they have more slots in the attention space. On the losingside, weakening schools amalgamate into defensive alliances, even amongformer enemies. Winners and losers are reciprocals of each other. In the historyof India, there are the successive splits and recombinations of Vedic, Buddhist,Hindu, Advaita Vedanta, and Vaishnava ascendancies and declines. In China,splits and recombinations take place among pre-Han philosophies, the Buddhistschools imported from India, the Zen schools, and the Neo-Confucians,like the opening and closing of a fan.Two further corollaries follow. Creativity does not happen only during thehappy times of material prosperity; there is creativity in the moments of closingdown, sometimes the most memorable creativity, because it takes the form ofcrowning syntheses at a high level of reflexive awareness. And even organiza-380 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathstional structures which later turn out to be stagnant, such as the Han bureaucracy,foster creativity at the moment of transition when the networks recombinecultural capital.On the personal level, the stars of intellectual life tend to be those who aredirectly involved in the organizational transformations, or are close in thenetworks to the center of action. Such are the Neo-Confucians, emerging atthe moment of struggle over the contents of the Sung examination system; orthe Kyoto school, arising when Japanese professors gain control of the newlyimported university system. We shall see it again in the circle of GermanIdealists who fought to construct the modern university.Sixth: Because intellectual life is structured by oppositions, leading innovatorsare often conservatives. In their own eyes they oppose the intellectual andinstitutional changes of their time. Instance the ultra-reactionary Mimamsas,setting off the wave of higher epistemological argument in India; the SungNeo-Confucians, arising to oppose the Wang An-shih reforms; or the wavesof Ancient Learning and National Learning in the Tokugawa, which bringabout a secularizing Japanese “Enlightenment.” Such intellectual movementsare nodes in a larger field of forces. In Europe we will see the creativity ofanti-modernists from Rousseau to Heidegger. Conservative opposition undernew conditions of heightened abstraction and reflexivity results in innovationsunder a veneer of pseudo-conservatism.Historical specificity is the result of combining general principles of socialcausality; it is too little appreciated that specificity and generality are notmutually incompatible, and that combinations of a fairly small set of causalprinciples can generate a huge variety of historical realizations. When we addthe successive recombinations that can take place over time, the total numberof distinct historical paths becomes infinite. Sociological analysis is our x-rayvision, allowing us to see the combinations which make up the specific configurationsof history as the arrangement of universal ingredients.Using the sociological ingredients just set forth, we could go on to reviewhow combinations of social conditions have constructed the historical uniquenessof Indian, Chinese, Japanese—and indeed European—philosophies. Topursue this argument would take us to background conditions of geopoliticsand political economy, the place of monasticism and the strength of governmentbureaucracy, conditions which varied widely among the parts of theworld. Even on this level the histories of social structures are not so divergentas Western-centered narratives—including Max Weber’s—have supposed.Viewed in the perspective of the long run, China and Japan worked out thevariants on a set of institutional ingredients; the combination of Buddhistmonasticism with a balance between centralized bureaucracy and decentralizingfeudalism eventually led to the takeoff of the capitalist market, and toConclusions: The Ingredients of Intellectual Life • 381religious secularization—a China-Japan sequence which parallels on separatetracks the Christian dynamic culminating in modern secular capitalist Europe.Indian history combines the ingredients in a rather different way, althoughthe intellectual results are more similar to European philosophy than theChinese are. Structural analysis enables us to pick out some turning points. Itis likely that without the Mogul conquest in the 1500s and the timing of itsdisintegration, which left the way open to European intrusion, Indian intellectuallife would have continued along the pathways of highly technical abstractionalready reached by its networks.Before moving on to the second part of this book, we already have thetheoretical tools in hand for understanding the social dynamics of Westernintellectuals. That is not to say that there is nothing analytically new to addressin the West. Islam and European Christendom are second-order civilizations,in the sense that their intellectual networks started out with cultural capitalimported from an ancient civilization, Greece. Once they threw off the subserviencethat comes with being an idea importer, they were able to launchthemselves on a level of abstraction and reflexivity already built up in theprevious networks. But this pattern is not unique to the West; China had aperiod of dependence on idea imports from India, and Japan was similarlydependent on China. After about 1765, however, European networks addedlevels of reflexive self-analysis on the nature of conceptual knowledge whichare distinctive in world philosophy. This is connected with two innovations inintellectual life.One is that an offshoot emerged from philosophical networks in the 1600s,resulting in a version of intellectual life that escaped from the law of smallnumbers. This was not the birth of natural science, which had existed in manyplaces around the world, but a distinctive form of social organization which Ishall call rapid-discovery science. Not that scientists’ networks now displacedphilosophers’ networks; rather, they added another network alongside theolder intellectual genealogy—indeed, two such networks, one of scientific andmathematical researchers, and in symbiosis with it a second network comprisinggenealogies of machines and techniques which generated an ongoing streamof new phenomena for scientific research. Rapid-discovery science became akind of cyborg network that challenged European philosophers, who remainedlocked in the oppositional dynamics of the law of small numbers. The resultwas not the disappearance of philosophy into science, but a new problem inphilosophical space which spurred reconceptualization on a higher level ofreflexivity.The second structural innovation of the West was the research university,an organizational revolution in the expanding educational system which putphilosophers, for the first time in history, in control of their own material base.382 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThe differentiation of disciplines, and the routinization of the impetus toinnovate, have shaped the reflexively modern world we have inhabited eversince. Yet even here we are not entirely without Asian parallels. The scholasticizationof large-scale bureaucratic education was pioneered in China, andhas some parallel in the technicalities fostered by the maths of late medievalIndia. And the same inflation of formalized cultural credentials in the shape ofthe degree-seeking which erodes contemporary American academic life is visiblein the inflation of grades of Buddhist enlightenment at periods in Indiaand Japan. Many of the ingredients have existed before; the modern West hastaken them to unpredecented levels.Common ills imply a common makeup. In the 1980s it became fashionable,indeed considered morally proper, to defend cultural uniqueness. But cultureis no deeper than skin color, though we have convinced ourselves it is morerespectable. To exult in the uniqueness and endurance of one’s own culturalconfiguration is conservative ethnocentrism. To praise the same kind of enduringessence in others is regarded as laudable humility; but as to the other itremains ethnocentrism, merely at second order and projected into the distance.The individual personalities that we take pride in as our own egos, and thecollective personalities we reify as cultures are fluid products of sociologicalprinciples that are the same for all of us. We share a common humanity underthe skin because we are constructed of the same ingredients.