CHAPTER 7£Innovation throughConservatism: JapanReligions generally look backwards to the sacredness of past tradition. Butreligions cannot avoid changing in changed social circumstances, and thetension of religious elites declines by accommodation with lay society. Newreligious initiatives often take such accommodation as a foil, putting themselvesforward as a revival, a conservative return to original purity. Yet what isrevived is constructed out of contemporary ingredients, and turns out to beinnovation in conservative guise, no less than religious movements whichannounce a new revelation.Philosophies embedded in religions undergo the same dynamics; so dosecular philosophies cutting free from a religious base. This is most forcefullyillustrated in the case of Japan. Innovation in the conservative mode, however,is not merely Asian traditionalism. Intellectual life is driven by oppositions,filling attention space under the law of small numbers; intellectual fame goesto those who carve out maximally distinctive positions. Conservative innovationis a mode of all intellectual life.Japanese society in many respects is a continuation of China’s. More tothe point, Japan gives an approximation of what China would have becomeif it had continued the trajectory of the T’ang and Sung dynasties. It wasduring those periods that Japan acquired organized structures of state andreligion beyond the level of clans; literate culture, art, and architecture alldeveloped by importing Chinese models. Japan broke free from the directinflux of Chinese culture at just the time when China was turning, institutionallyand intellectually, in a different direction. It was medieval China, BuddhistdominatedChina, that Japan continued; the stifling bureaucratic centralizationof Ming and Ch’ing, after the independence of Buddhist high culture hadbeen crushed, occurred while Japan was becoming autonomous. In tracingmodern Japanese development, we have a laboratory for what a society builton Buddhist organizational structures would produce, economically and intellectually.322Japanese philosophy in the centuries up through about 1300 directly continuedChinese networks; all the major Chinese Buddhist schools were imported,with a bias toward those dating from the end of the creative period ofChinese Buddhism. Hence the predominance in Japan of Zen, since the mostintense flow of Japanese sojourners and Chinese missionaries coincided withthe late Sung and early Yuan, when active Buddhism had winnowed down tothe Lin-chi (Rinzai) and Ts’ao-Tung (Soto) lineages. These dynasties too werethe time of the Neo-Confucian movement, and the moment when it waskeeping up contacts with the Ch’an lineages; thus the most philosophicallyabstract of Confucian metaphysics was carried into Japan and taught in theZen-based education which proliferated from the Muromachi period onward.In several respects the Japanese were Chinese-style intellectuals. Lay concernspenetrated the intellectual sphere, keeping thought more concrete and ata lower level of philosophical abstraction. During the phase when the monasteriesdominated culture production, Buddhist leaders were political monks,consorting with political-military factions and intervening weightily in theirstruggles with monastic armies. Zen set itself off as the most conservative wingof Buddhism, in opposition to the radicalism of the Pure Land movementsamong the commoners. But Zen too underwent its own accommodation withthe upper strata, resulting in the style-conscious gentry Buddhism developedin the most elite Zen monasteries, where religious practice turned into a refinedaesthetics which became the mark of highest secular prestige. The backlashagainst monastic political power, when the era of feudalism was finally overcomeby the absolutist Tokugawa state, was a secularizing reformation. Nowthe politicization of the intellectuals shifted in a new direction. Beneath theveneer of Confucian and Shinto revivalism, Tokugawa intellectuals resembledtheir contemporaries, the anti-clerical activists of the French Enlightenment.Burgeoning market competition both in education and in mass culture producedintellectuals oriented toward secular topics of history, philology, andeconomics, while despising metaphysical speculation. Despite the reactionaryand authoritarian tone which made up the surface ideology of Tokugawadiscourse, Japanese intellectuals became modernists on their own path; boththeir secularist wing and their neo-traditionalist opponents sound like quarrelingEuropean intellectuals after the downfall of the state church and religiouscontrol over education.The organizational bases of intellectual production became similar in Japanand Europe, insofar as both went through a long transition to religious secularizationand the corresponding loss of religious control over the educationalsystem. It is no coincidence that Japanese Buddhism became the more“Protestant,” breaking with monasticism to allow married priests, and encouraginglay participation within the remaining celibate orders. Both places wentInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 323through a “Renaissance” period when the wealthy clerical elite secularizedfrom within, turning most of its attention to artistic production. There camea further phase of religious decline under state regulation, building up tofull-fledged outbreaks of anti-clericalism. And both places experienced counterwavesof religious neoconservatism within the secularizing tide. Structurally,Tokugawa Japan and the most secularizing and capitalist-dominated parts ofEurope underwent a rapid expansion of the educational and printing markets,with the resulting proliferation of mass popular culture. This too left its markon the tone of intellectual production; “Enlightenment”-style “philosophes”and popular authors appeared virtually contemporarily in both places.We should remind ourselves again that intellectual creativity is no merereflex of economics and politics. There are three layers of causality: (1) economic-political structures, which in turn shape (2) the organizations whichsupport intellectual life; and these in turn allow the buildup of (3) networksamong participants in centers of attention on intellectual controversies, whichconstitute the idea-substance of intellectual life. Economic-political conditionsdetermine ideas not directly but by way of shaping, and above all by changing,the intermediate level, the organizational base of intellectual production.We see this pattern by a very general overview of the networks of Japaneseintellectuals in the five figures in this chapter. In those figures are all thephilosophers and religious-intellectual leaders who commanded much attentionacross the generations.1 The networks show four periods of creativity, each ofwhich coincides with one of the major shifts in the political and economicstructure of Japan.Around 800 (and apparently within a year of each other), the first twomajor Japanese Buddhists, Saicho and Kukai, found the schools of Tendai andShingon, which would dominate for 400 years thereafter. This happens at justthe time of the founding of the capital city at Kyoto, beginning the Heianperiod of ceremonial court rule (794–1185).In the generation 1165–1200 there begins a network of notable Buddhists,which extends densely down to 1335–1365, followed by isolated figures ofsecondary eminence in the next two generations. Here we see a burst of tightlyconnected creative figures, with the usual splits and simultaneous rival lineages,continuing for six generations, with a decline in network continuity andcreative eminence for two generations thereafter. This marks the foundationof the Zen lineages, and includes virtually all of their famous members (leavingaside a last flourish of Zen in the Tokugawa); typically in each generation thereis at least one memorable Rinzai master, plus an equally distinguished rival(usually in Soto). In addition, in the early generations, where the most importantZen masters appear, the main versions of Japanese Pure Land popularBuddhism are created in another tight network. The beginning of this period324 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsof creativity coincides with the major institutional break, the transition fromthe Heian court rule to Kamakura feudalism.After five generations empty of major or secondary philosophers (andsparse even in minor ones), another dense, competitive network of creativethinkers appears in the generation 1600–1635. This network continues to turnup significant rival thinkers down to 1800 and, more loosely connected, to1835. The underlying transition is the Tokugawa unification; again we see athinning out of its networks of creativity after six generations.After an interval of minor figures during two or three generations in the1800s, there is a burst of major and secondary creativity, linked in a tightnetwork, during 1900–1935. This is the Kyoto school, which suddenly revivesBuddhist philosophy in a blend with Western (mainly German) metaphysics.The underlying shift is not precisely the Meiji restoration, which is followedby a single generation in which philosophy is dominated by imitative importsof European ideas. What has shifted by the 1890s is a new organizational basefor intellectual production: the autonomous university, which becomes thehome of the Kyoto school and its rivals and offshoots.In general, then, we find four major networks of creativity, correspondingto the onset of four major institutional transitions in the outermost politicalstructuralbase. Looking more closely, we can see that the immediate means ofintellectual production also changed at each period, opening up new opportunitiesfor intellectual life and stimulating the formulation of new positions. Intwo of these instances (1165–1365 and 1600–1800), the network lasts for halfa dozen generations before petering out. In one case (800–835) there is onlya single creative generation (in the case of 1900–1935 it appears that thenetwork continues, but I do not trace this further). What keeps the networksgoing for such six-generation periods is not the transition per se, but theongoing dynamics of the intellectual competition.There is an almost perfect correlation between the onset of new politicaleconomicstructures and the onset of intellectual creative networks, with onenegative case: the transition from Kamakura to Muromachi. This marks theshift between the rule of clan feudalism by the Kamakura shoguns (1185–1330)and the much more decentralized (and commercialized) feudalism which set inwith the weak Ashikaga shogunate (1338–1573). The latter (especially theSengoku or “Country at War” period after 1467, when Japan was a patchworkof rival military domains, self-governing cities, and monastic states) was themajor economic growth period, the time of Buddhist penetration into thecountryside, and of the fusion of the hierarchy of Zen monasteries with thefeudal aristocracy. But although it was a time of cultural flourishing, in artswhich have come to characterize the Japanese aesthetic (tea ceremony, brushpainting, garden architecture), it was a vacuum for noteworthy philosophers,Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 325religious or otherwise. In what follows I shall be concerned to show whysurrounding conditions did not stir up another wave of intellectual creativityat that time; or, more precisely, why creative energy built up in gentry aestheticsbut not in abstract philosophy.Japan as Transformer of Chinese BuddhismThe Japanese state arose around 600 c.e. as an imitation of T’ang dynastycentralized administration.2 But no status group of Confucian literati appeared.Government became controlled by a web of marriage politics manipulated byregents who married their daughters to emperors, who were themselves stifledby ceremony and encouraged to abdicate in favor of child figureheads. Shadowrule dispersed authority as sexual politics multiplied claimants to the throne.Further layers of shadow rule emerged; ex-emperors, sometimes retired toBuddhist monasteries, exercised “cloistered rule” of behind-the-scenes manipulation.Court factions allied with provincial warrior clans whose fightingbrought the Heian rule to an end after 1165. In the following period of feudalusurpation, families of regents as well as ex-shoguns and ex-emperors manipulatedlayers of front-stage officeholders from behind the ceremonial screen.The Buddhist monasteries became military powers, whose lower-rankingtemple workers became shock troops, intervening in succession and propertydisputes, at first between rival monasteries, then from 1100 on in the politicaldisputes of the capital. The centralized tax system was undermined, beginningas early as the 800s, as private estates were withdrawn from state landownership.At first favored monasteries, along with self-interested court families,acquired the privilege of private property and fiscal immunity; when theseadvantages eventually were acquired by the provincial aristocracy, centralizedgovernment collapsed into feudalism.One consequence of shadow rule was to preserve Shinto, despite its archaiccharacter as a plurality of animistic cults lacking central organizational structure.Originally the most important of the Shinto deities symbolized the leadingclans; clan chiefs had been simultaneously (even primarily) priests in charge ofthe ritual. After the emergence of Chinese-style central government and of thewealthy and literate Buddhist monasteries, one might have expected Shinto tofade to the level of local folk religion; Shinto managed to preserve itself on thenational scene down to the 1300s only by being taken under the organizationaland ideological auspices of Buddhism. Shinto remained politically alive becauseshadow rule focused attention on the imperial line almost exclusively in itsceremonial and symbolic character. Without the substance of power, the emperorswere defined by their religious ancestry; the old clan chief–priest rolewas brought again to the fore. Given the parcelization of power, the imperial326 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathscult could be used as a weapon whenever a major challenge to de factoauthority was mounted. The upsurges of Shinto ideology correspond to thethree main periods of struggle against the shogunate: Go-Daigo’s brief restorationof imperial power in the 1330s, the cult of National Learning in themid-Tokugawa, and the Meiji restoration. It is a glib rhetoric which characterizesJapanese cultural tradition as a harmonious syncretism of Shinto, Buddhism,and Confucianism. The relative strengths of the three religions variedconsiderably under different historical conditions; periods of intense conflictamong them were among the main dynamics of Japanese intellectual creativity.Buddhist monasteries became the basis of intellectual life. By the mid-700s,six philosophical schools had been introduced from China, some even by directpupils of the famous Hsüan-tsang (see 3–5 in Figure 7.1). But there was nothingintellectually original in these first half-dozen generations. The prestige ofimports filled up the attention space. This is typical enough of idea importers,as we see in Rome, Islamic Iraq, Spain, and Christian Europe (see Chapter 8,Coda). Philosophical content was subordinated to sectarian identification; thegreat temples at Nara came close to direct theocratic rule. The first great namesof Japanese Buddhism, Saicho and Kukai, appeared as a pair in the same circleof court officials. The setting was the power vacuum that occurred whengovernment moved to Heian-kyo (Kyoto) in 794 to escape monastic power atNara. Saicho and Kukai went to China, where they acquired lineage connectionsas yet lacking in Japan, receiving ordination directly from Buddhistmasters superior in prestige to the Nara schools.3 Saicho’s new monastery, onMount Hiei overlooking Kyoto, became the primary ordination hall for Japanesemonks. His new sect, Tendai (T’ien-t’ai), thereby became the organizationalcenter of Japanese Buddhism; for the following 15 generations, downto 1300, virtually every notable Buddhist, including the leaders of the PureLand and Zen sects, would be a pupil at Mount Hiei. Kukai made a differentselection from the network of Chinese masters, most impressively by securingordination from the tantric lineage.4 He returned to Japan to found theShingon school, with its great monastery on Mount Koya, beyond Nara.Thereafter Shingon and Tendai between them become effectively the nationalreligions.5Both schools incorporated shamanastic orders. Magical Buddhism becamethe card to trump Shinto; the indigenous gods (kami) became interpreted asmanifestations of the Buddha. Tendai developed its own esoteric branches, likeShingon giving prominence to magic and ritual over meditation and philosophy.Buddhist monasteries of the Heian period became so powerful in mundaneaffairs that they fused with the outermost economic and political layer ofsociety. In the sociological three-level causal model, the inner organizationallevel providing a base for intellectual specialists was largely eliminated, andInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 327FIGURE 7.1. NETWORK OF JAPANESE PHILOSOPHERS, 600–1100:FOUNDING OF TENDAI AND SHINGON328 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthere was no longer much autonomy left for internal networks of intellectualargument and creativity. The content of Buddhism became largely identicalwith lay concerns for the fortunes of daily life; Heian society was permeatedwith taboos and pollutions manifesting this fusion of religion and society.The creative eminence of Saicho and Kukai is a blip amid the surroundinggenerations, where virtually nothing of intellectual note occurred among thereligious leaders. The only important creativity in these centuries was not inphilosophy or religion at all, but in the most secularized sector: the sophisticatedobservations on marriage politics and shadow rule in Lady Murasaki’sTale of Genji and Sei Shonagon’s Pillowbook. In Figure 7.1 there are no othernames of any sort in that generation (1000–1035), when the court women’sliterary world reigned alone.When philosophical creativity suddenly came alive, it did so simultaneouslyin several branches each of Pure Land and Zen. This was not an emergence ofnew religious doctrine. Zen and Amidaism had both existed for many centuriesin China. In Japan, Zen had been part of the Tendai synthesis since at leastthe time of Saicho. The Amida salvation cult, with its characteristic ritual ofNembutsu (chanting the savior’s name), was similarly long-standing. It too hadcome in during the early days of Tendai; around the mid-900s Mount Hieileaders had traveled among the common people, popularizing communal recitation,founding lay groups, singing and dancing to the accompaniment ofdrumming on begging bowls. What was new about the Pure Land orders whichburst on the scene between the time of Honen (who founded the Pure Landsect, Jodo, in 1175) and Nichiren (who founded the Lotus sect, Hokke, in1253) was not so much doctrinal as organizational. These new orders, emergingwithin the older centers, broke with their lineages, often with unprecedentedexclusiveness and militancy, and reshaped the social form of JapaneseBuddhism. The same is true of Zen, with a different social base and a differentmethod of reforming contemporary magical-ritual practice. The rapid upheavalof Buddhist organization on so many fronts, after centuries of stagnation,accompanied a deep shift in the surrounding political and economic structure.The doctrinal ingredients had long been in existence; they were merely put ina new and purified form, to create distinctive ideologies supporting the neworganizational paths which had now become available.Population had grown and spread widely beyond the home provinces ofcentral Honshu; an economic base developed in considerable part through theorganizing activities of Buddhist evangelists, which could support Buddhisttemples beyond the court-centered monasteries near the old capital cities.Politically, the great monasteries and their troops were tied to the factions ofregents and ex-emperors who struggled over control of Kyoto. Central controldisintegrated as local administrators built up their own forces, and fragmentsInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 329of the ever-dividing imperial kin eventually mobilized them for battles over thecenter. In 1180–1185 full-scale civil war resulted in the new shadow governmentof the military shogun, moving the de facto center of government eastwardto Kamakura. In 1221 the ex-emperor Go-Toba renewed the struggle,using warrior-priests from the old religious-court alliances of the home provinces,especially the Tendai establishment at Mount Hiei. These forces provedINTELLECTUAL AND RELIGIOUS CENTERS OF JAPAN330 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsinsufficient against professional warriors. The old lines of religious-politicalpower were disrupted; their provision of ritual as well as military resources tothe old factions of the center was now outmoded.The warriors of the provinces marshaled under the great military clans nowfar outweighed both the old court forces and the thinly armed and unruly mobsof monastic armies. A new counterbalance was arising. The Pure Land organizationswere creating a new economic resource that could be mobilized intotruly significant military strength. Popular Buddhism, spreading throughoutthe countryside, led to the development of trade links, amassing and reinvestingcapital. Missionaries and traveling evangelists, and the pilgrim routes left intheir wake, built up links of popular communication and material flow.The crisis of religious-political legitimation comes across most clearly inNichiren. Why had the imperial forces lost in 1221 despite the incantationsand prayers of Tendai and Shingon? Nichiren saw the occasion as a crisis offaith. What path for salvation could take the place of these disproven methods?The old orders belonged to the corruption of the times. The ecclesiasticallineage for transmission of office, the center of previous struggles over ordinationhalls and masters’ certificates, was radically abrogated by a purely charismatic,spiritual succession. Reveling in newfound social resources, Nichirendeclared that the throne should be subservient to religion.Nichiren’s was only the most militant of the movements oriented towardproselytizing the new popular base at this time of breakdown of the oldreligious-political alliances. Honen, too, had been stripped of his clerical statusin 1207, and his Pure Land sect banned from the capital, for declaring theNembutsu the favored path to rebirth in paradise. His pupil Shinran—like allthe other Pure Land reformers a former Mount Hiei monk—made the sharpestorganizational break of all. His True Pure Land sect (known as Ikko, singleminded),founded in 1224, broke down the fundamental structure of Buddhistmonasticism. Monks could be married; religion became a practice of laycongregations rather than world-rejecting virtuosi. In this respect Shinran isthe Martin Luther of Buddhism. In the breakdown of religious authority duringthe overthrow of the Kyoto government, Honen was radical enough to bepushed out of the monastic establishment. In his circle of declericalized followersShinran took the further step of declaring that a non-institutionalizedreligion, apart from the monasteries, the court, and their rituals, was the truereligious path. The magical Buddhism of ceremonies and chants, aimed atcleansing pollutions and achieving worldly success, was replaced by an innersense of sinfulness, from which only faith could provide salvation. Shinran’sversion of popular Pure Land became a purely ethical form of Buddhism. Insubsequent generations, Shinran’s followers became a network linking thecountryside and the commercialized towns into a church so powerful that itswealth and its armies made it the equal of any feudal domain.Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 331Zen as Conservative InnovationThe outburst of Zen lineages occurred in the same generations as the radicalPure Land movements, and took the opposite side of the field from them.Instead of proclaiming social and religious transformation, Zen was conservative;it reasserted the traditional Buddhist stance in its purest form, meditativedetachment from the world. Nevertheless, conservatives in a situation of structuralopposition are forced into their own path of innovation.The leaders of the Zen orders began, like the Pure Land founders, asoffshoots of the Tendai establishment, the great Mount Hiei center from whichall the action emanated. Whereas Pure Land quickly shifted to popular recruitmentin the provinces, Zen retained its upper-class connections; soon it wastaking ex-emperors into its ranks, and several of its famous leaders were sonsand grandsons of emperors. Zen became known as the religion of the warriorclass, but it never broke its links with the court aristocracy. Throughout thecivil wars, including the effort of the ex-emperor Go-Daigo to restore directrule in the 1330s, leading Zen masters such as Muso Soseki maintained closeties with the emperor, while making the transition to patronage by the victoriousAshikaga shoguns. Although Zen has the reputation of having provideda religious ideology for the samurai, this was largely a matter of social connections.The truth is that Zen monasteries were far more peaceful than eitherthe Pure Land orders or the traditional power centers such as Mount Hiei;abjuring political involvement, they rarely became involved in the internecinecombat among monasteries or in secular warfare.Zen was structurally more cosmopolitan than the Pure Land orders andpursued an intellectual trajectory at a higher level of reflexivity. Only the Zennetworks made contact with China. The reason for this connection should notbe taken for granted. Chinese Buddhism at this time was far from flourishing.Ch’an was on its last legs. The great creative period was far in the past, andthe major activity of recent Ch’an leaders was the historical compilation oftheir legendary doings into the koan collections. As Figures 6.3 and 6.4 display,the fanning out of rival Ch’an lineages during the centuries from 700 to 900,typical of the filling of dominant attention space under the law of smallnumbers, had given way to the winnowing out and amalgamation of lineages.Virtually all other Buddhist sects had disappeared except Ch’an and Amidaism;in the defensive mode, Ch’an had become doctrinally syncretist, reversing itsanti-scriptural path of pure and direct enlightenment which had prevailed inthe heyday of its organizational expansion. Hua-yen (Japanese Kegon) andT’ien-tai (Tendai) survived only by being carried along inside Ch’an houses.6Heinrich Doumoulin (1988: 284, 287) traces no lineages after 1300, and refersto the period after the Sung as a time of “syncretistic tendencies and decline,”332 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathswithout creative figures. Within Rinzai, one line absorbed all other schools,and by the Ming dynasty, Soto as well. In the Ming all Chinese Buddhist sectsfused around a combination of Zen practice and the simplified nembutsuchanting of the Pure Land movements. Here too the organizational base hadshifted; Zen’s elite base declined, and organizationally everything was carriedby popular Amidaism.This does not seem much of a magnet for a movement of independentJapanese Zen, breaking away to revive the pure meditation practice at just thetime when Amidaism was claiming exclusive possession of religious turf. Whatthe Zen leaders were seeking was not inspiration but organizational legitimation.The earliest figures of the Zen independence movement were explicitlyconcerned to establish their own lineages, and they did so by means of connectionswith China. As usual, this happened simultaneously among rivalinnovators (see Figure 7.2). Dainichi Nonin (fl. 1189) achieved enlightenmenton his own and founded a monastery; but he was not recognized as a Zenmaster until he had sent pupils to China to bring back a certificate of enlightenment,making him a dharma heir, fifty-first in the line from ShakyamuniBuddha.7 Nonin’s better-known rival Eisai studied in China in 1187–1191 toacquire a certificate of enlightenment and Zen lineage credentials. The movementseemed to be feeling its way gradually toward Zen radicalism. Eisai’sreputation as Zen founder was created largely in retrospect, as the lineage thatcame after him pushed toward a radically purified Zen which set it in sharpcontrast to all other schools.8This is a particularly clear instance where we see that the network is moreimportant than the individual. Reputations are built up over a period ofgenerations. Especially where innovative ideas and practices come from along-term change in the organizational base, the full ideological ramificationsof what has transpired do not emerge for many decades; after that, the changeis likely to be attributed disproportionately to some early names, who becomeemblems for what the entire lineage has accomplished. We have seen the samething in China, where the Ch’an movement made sacred emblems out ofBodhidharma, and secondarily out of the patriarch of the southern school,Hui-neng, associated with the famous break; whereas the true innovativenessof the Zen style was the work of Shih-t’ou, Ma-tsu, and others in the followinggenerations. In Japan, the transformation of the entire religious attention spaceby the 1220s, above all with the spectacular breakaway of the Pure Land sects,drove home the reality that a new organizational path was available. JapaneseZen was the conservative branch of innovation, a movement of radical purifiersand ultra-traditionalists, sucked into radicalism by unfolding circumstances.The new slot in the attention space was quickly exploited by several lineagesof contenders. Eisai’s pupils and grandpupils, taking up the prestige of theInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 333FIGURE 7.2. EXPANSION OF PURE LAND AND ZEN, 1100–1400Chinese Lin-chi (Rinzai) line, soon produced a number of figures of at leastsecondary fame. Among them, Enni Ben’en was instrumental in giving precedenceto Zen meditation as the one practice that carries the mind of Buddhathroughout the centuries; though he still allowed the practice of rituals andscripture readings, Enni downgraded miraculous powers to insignificance,thereby breaking with the prevalent themes of Tendai and Shingon. Enni’sgreat-grandpupil Kanzan Egen in the mid-1300s brought a full revival ofclassical Lin-chi rigor, handing out enlightenment with shouts and blows ofthe staff.Parallel with the line of famous Rinzai masters in these generations, thereemerged a line of Soto masters. Soto was officially imported from China byDogen. Japanese networks reorganized to fill the attention space with rivalschools. Dogen began as a grandpupil of Eisai, but he already had a trajectorytoward independence since he and his principal follower, Koun Ejo (who playeda similar organizational role in Soto as Enni in Rinzai), were also trained bythe lineage of Dainichi Nonin. The Soto-Rinzai rivalry continued the conflictwhich already existed in the generation of the proto-founders of Japanese Zen.Other lineages too were founded at this time, typically by a combination ofsplitting off by pupils of the earlier Japanese masters, plus travel to China topick up direct credentials—a practice which was at its height throughoutthe 1200s, despite the upheavals of the Mongol conquest and the atmosphereof Japanese chauvinism during the Mongol invasion threat from the 1260sthrough 1300.9Soto and Rinzai: Rival NichesThe moment of transition during the organizational break which first openedup the Zen movement promoted a rare peak of philosophical creativity. Theoutstanding figure here was not in the Rinzai movement but from its opponent.Dogen built on two conflicts. In China he studied under the master T’ien-tungJu-ching (356 in Figure 6.4), notable primarily for attacking the famous Ta-huifor syncretizing Ch’an with Confucianism and Taoism (Kodera, 1980: 102–103)—a doctrinal retreat characteristic of schools in organizational decline.Upon returning to Japan, Dogen developed his independent position by extendingthe controversy. He criticized Ta-hui for emphasizing the doctrine ofemptying and quieting, instead of the original Buddha nature; more generally,Dogen accused Chinese Ch’an of slandering the sutras and reducing Buddhismto a few sayings of Lin-chi (Dumoulin, 1990: 57–62). In effect this was anattack on the central Lin-chi/Rinzai practice of koan meditation. Since Ta-huiwas a famous ancestor of the Rinzai line, Dogen’s criticism put him in immediateconfrontation with his Japanese contemporaries. Perhaps this was Do-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 335gen’s intention. Dogen’s position in the 1230s had been moderate and evenincluded some koan teaching; but after Enni returned from China in 1241 andreceived massive patronage for building the Tofuku-ji, Dogen began to polemicizeagainst the lack of true succession in Japanese Rinzai. The correct practicewas not solving koan but “sitting straight” without effort at enlightenment.Soto became the unembellished practice of zazen, without paradoxes or deeptrance. Enlightenment itself is not to be overstressed as a goal; post-enlightenmentpractice was especially important. The creativity of Japanese Soto was anegation of the previous Zen innovation. If the Zen movement generally wasa conservative throwback against Pure Land innovation, Dogen was the innovatorwho found the ultraconservative path. Against his intention, this movedhim dialectically onward.Dogen’s philosophical writings articulate Zen without the paradoxes. Inplace of the paradoxical koan style, he explains the identity of conventionaloppositions: existence and nirvana, time and mind and the Buddha. Truth isfluid, daily experience: “The very impermanency of grass and tree, thicket andforest, is the Buddha nature. The very impermanency of men and things, bodyand mind, is the Buddha nature. Nature and lands, mountains and rivers, areimpermanent because they are Buddha nature. Supreme and complete enlightenment,because it is the Buddha nature, is impermanent. Great Nirvana,because it is impermanent, is the Buddha nature” (quoted in Dumoulin, 1990:85). Enlightenment is the grasping of this identity.Part of Dogen’s motivation was to downplay the deliberate seeking ofenlightenment experience in conventional Zen practice. This led to Dogen’smost original thinking, on the nature of time. Buddhahood does not revealitself to us on some occasion, as the culmination of Zen practice. Instead,Buddhahood is itself time. “He who wants to know Buddhahood may knowit by knowing time as it is revealed to us. And as time is something in whichwe are already immersed, Buddhahood also is not something that is to besought in the future but something that is realized where we are” (quoted inKitagawa, 1987: 301). One’s self is time. Dogen criticizes the view that timeflows from past through present into future, as if “while the time and mountainmay still exist I have now passed them by and I, at the present time, reside ina fine vermilion palace. To [a person who believes thus], the mountain andriver and I are as far distant as heaven from earth.” But past and future arereally all one time, only one moment, “the absolute presence, in which all thatis present or absent is as such present” (quoted in Dumoulin, 1990: 88). Fullygrasping one moment is to touch all of reality.Dogen’s philosophy was not followed up by any notable intellectual descendants;eventually it was rediscovered in the 1920s, when it became ammunitionfor the Kyoto school of modern academic philosophy. Organizationally336 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsand ideologically, however, Dogen launched a successful new trajectory forZen. He consummated the shift from Zen syncretism to the doctrine of puremeditation. His monasteries were the first to build a detached monks’ hallsolely for meditation. In part he was moved by fortuitous political pressures;in the 1230s, as he raised his claim to the truest Buddhist path, his Kyotocenter was attacked by Mount Hiei troops, leading Dogen to establish his headmonastery in then-remote Echizen Province (some 100 miles north of thecapital). In fact he was following the population flow, which had spread fromthe home provinces to the north. Dogen’s disowning of paradoxical koan fittedwell with a movement away from the sophisticated elite; and his emphasis onthe identity of enlightenment with everyday life was an incentive for ordinarywork. Soto’s practices emerged at the same time that the Pure Land movementswere spreading to much the same audiences. Dogen had originally studied withPure Land teachers, and his Soto was in effect a Zen competitor to Pure Land.In the generations after Dogen, Soto spread very widely, away from thecapital cities where Rinzai flourished. Soto monks worked in the fields alongsidethe people; lay associations were formed around the temples, throughwhich the laity, including women, could join in meditation (Dumoulin, 1990:138–143, 208–210, 213–214). Organizational success watered down Soto’sdistinctiveness. The third-generation disciple Keizan Jokin inherited a greatShingon temple as well as a Soto lineage; from this base Keizan initiated thenationwide Soto movement, at the cost of mixing Zen with Shingon rituals,burial services, incantations, and prayers for worldly well-being. Dogen’s originalpolemic notwithstanding, koan were reintroduced as an aid against distractionduring meditation. Keizan’s pupil Gasan Joseki, in the mid-1300s,eliminated the unorthodoxy by replacing koan with a five-stanza formulawhich pithily summarized the essence of the Hua-yen (Kegon) metaphysics,taken over from the Kegon school, now largely defunct in Japan. The formulasnow took precedence over the study of Dogen’s philosophy; an extensivescholarly literature became developed in commentaries on this so-called doctrineof the Five Ranks. Soto took on the character of an educational institution,paralleling Rinzai, but at a different social level: whereas the Rinzaimonasteries of the Five Mountains became cultivated academies of the elite,Soto monasteries became schools for the rural populace. Thereafter Rinzai andSoto carried on in their independent niches. In both branches the routinizationand scholasticism of organizational success was setting in.The Rinzai Establishment and Secularization by Aesthetic EliteRinzai Zen lost little time in becoming accepted into the highest level of thenew political establishment, while keeping on excellent terms with the old courtInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 337aristocracy. Rinzai’s organizational basis became the provision of aesthetic highculture which linked all the rival elites into a unified status group. In 1246under Enni, Zen acquired its first grand temple, the Tofuku-ji at Kyoto,designed to compete with the splendor of the cathedrals of the traditional Naraschools. Its sponsor was a retired official from the once-dominant Fujiwarafamily. Around the same time the Kamakura shoguns built a similar string ofgreat Rinzai temples, beginning with the Kenchoji (1251) and the Engakuji(1282), with their imposing architecture and spectacular hillside settings. Theirheads were the most prestigeful monks who could be found, including Lan-hsi(an immigrant disciple from one of the main Chinese masters), and KohoKennichi, a son of the ex-emperor. From this lineage, in the early 1300s, cameMuso Soseki, himself an imperial relative, who gathered further connectionswith the highly prestigious Chinese lines. Muso went on to found several moregreat Zen monasteries at Kyoto, including one in a palace donated by the newshogun.Under the Ashikaga shoguns, the great temples of Kyoto and Kamakurabecame recognized as the “Five Mountains” (in fact, five in each city), whichpresided over a hierarchy of secondary and provincial temples. The Ashikagasmade Rinzai the de facto state religion. Zen temples were built in everyprovince throughout the country; their revenues were property of the Rinzaihierarchy, under a civil official who supervised all Zen and Vinaya monasteries.In actuality, this state minister was drawn from the Zen masters, and in 1379the office was handed over to monastic administration. Materially, the Rinzaielite were the apex of Japanese society. The Zen culture that emerged set thehigh-status standards of aesthetized lifestyle which have prevailed in Japan eversince. Muso Soseki designed temples and gardens as symbols of the cosmos,including the first of the famous Kyoto rock and moss gardens. Flower gardens,which had been conventional to that time, were displaced by a purified aestheticpermeated with the abstract consciousness honed by Zen meditation.Tea, which began to be cultivated in Japan on temple grounds after seeds werebrought from China by Eisai, was expanded into a cult ceremonial, carried outin special pavilions in idyllic garden settings. The Noh play was invented inthe context of the increasingly secularized mixture of Zen aesthetics andaristocratic entertainment. Zen monks established the vogue of painting withsimplified and spontaneous ink strokes; the most famous lineage of painters—Josetsu, Shubun, and Sesshu—were all priest-artists in the 1400s connectedwith one of the Kyoto Five Mountains.10In the period from 1300 to 1600, the Rinzai monasteries, with theirlibraries and art collections, were the material centers of cultural productionand display. In retrospect, we tend to take for granted that this is simply what“Japanese culture” is. In fact, the cultural style emerged at this time as a sharp338 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathstransition within Buddhism. Previously, in the Kamakura period, Buddhismhad not produced significant works in painting, sculpture, or literature; thesearose with the organizational transition in the Muromachi (Yamamura, 1990:582). The artistic productivity that appeared after 1400 shifted decisively in asecular direction. Paintings broke free from traditional religious themes to takeup worldly subjects, as well as non-Buddhist “classical mythology” from Confucianismand Taoism.11This secularization of the means of cultural production took place in thetransitional generations as priests became mixed with a new semi-laity. In theprocess, religion lost its tension with lay practices; the essentials of religionbecame redefined as aesthetic. In Kyoto during the 1300s, taking the tonsurewas a means of freeing oneself from court rankings; such tonseisha priests hadno formal ties with temples and continued a secular lifestyle (Varley, 1977:186–189). These individuals promoted the secularizing aesthetics of the artisticgolden age of the 1400s; by decreasing the gap between laity and clergy, theyhelped delegitimate Buddhism in much the same way that the Humanists ofthe European Renaissance began a wave of neo-paganism culminating in thecultural displacement of medieval Catholicism.The breach in the clergy-lay border opened the gates for the extreme socialfluidity of the Muromachi period. Rinzai schools became open to lay pupils aswell as monks. This is the path toward the secular university, which we haveseen in India at great training centers such as Nalanda, and which we willfollow in the Christian universities of Europe. From the outset Rinzai sojournersin China had brought back Neo-Confucianism; it was propagated in Japannot as a separate school but as part of the general literary education at theRinzai temples. In the late 1300s the Ashikaga shoguns supported an academywith thousands of students, many of them laity, taught by a staff of Zen monks(Kitagawa, 1990: 126). Central to the curriculum were the Chinese classics,taught in much the same spirit as Latin and Greek within Christian Europe,as purely cultural accomplishments apart from religious orthodoxy. In thismode of secularism and scholarly eclecticism, the Neo-Confucian commentarieswere kept alive in Japan under Buddhist auspices.Why then did this proto-“university” structure fail to produce the takeoffinto abstract philosophy that characteristically went along with it elsewhere?No philosophical creativity came out of these studies; the classics were simplymemorized and used as materials for historical allusions (Dumoulin, 1990:176). No competitive network emerged among rival centers in philosophy; asingle center dominated, without opposing schools of thought. And focus ofattention was not on an inward orientation to argument among intellectualspecialists but on the aesthetics shared with a leisured upper-class laity. Suchoutward orientation of a religious elite toward social standing in a decentral-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 339ized aristocracy produces the culture of lifestyle aestheticism. The respective“Renaissance” periods of Europe and Japan share another similarity besidesconcentration on artistic creativity: they are also troughs in first-rate philosophicalcreativity, as we can see by comparing the 1400s and 1500s in Figures9.6 and 9.7 and the virtually coinciding period (1365–1600) in Figures 7.2 and7.3. In both cases the philosophical intellectuals were taken up with importsof “antiquarian” culture, ancient Greek and Latin and Neo-Confucianism,respectively. Imports and revivals were filling up the attention space, substitutingfor the formation of new lines of intellectual fractionalization. It wouldtake a break with the entire Buddhist base and the rise of a new mode ofintellectual production in the Tokugawa educational marketplace to jolt a newintellectual restructuring in the direction of abstract thought.FIGURE 7.3. ZEN ARTISTS AND TEA MASTERS, 1400–1600340 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsThe Inflation of Zen Enlightenment and theScholasticization of KoanThe material expansion of the Zen lineages brought problems of organizationalcontrol and status legitimation. Enlightenment was not only a personal religiousexperience; it was also a socially recognized rite of passage. When accompaniedby a certificate of enlightenment from an authenticated master, itentitled one to become head of one’s own monastery, even founder of a lineage.Organizational expansion thus went along with the increasing commonness ofenlightenment, and sowed the seeds of organizational fragmentation.Soto managed the expansion more smoothly, downplaying enlightenment,and instituting from the early 1300s a periodic rotation of abbots in office.Each master would appoint five main disciples, who shared in authority,allowing for expansion while linking new foundations to the center (Dumoulin,1990: 197, 206–210). In Rinzai, the elite Five Mountains at Kyotoand Kamakura, with their huge properties, kept a semblance of ranking at thetop; but a proliferation of masters in outlying areas became known as the Zen“forest” (rinka), repudiating authority and giving out enlightenment certificateswithout requiring the recipient to renounce affiliation to his current lineage.By the late 1400s, an inflation of enlightenment certificates set in; pupilstraveled from master to master collecting as many as possible. One reactionwas iconoclasm. The most famous Zen figure of that generation, Ikkyu Sojun,allegedly burned his enlightenment certificate (Dumoulin, 1990: 194).12 Ikkyu,an illegitimate son of the emperor, was very much part of the aesthetic elite.For him, Zen meant a spontaneous, wandering life, devoted to artistic pursuitswhich made him the most famous calligrapher of the Muromachi period, anda founder of the ink-stroke painting style.The underlying problem of maintaining religious tradition was that Buddhismhad set off an economic transformation of Japanese society. Buddhistorganizations from 1200 through the 1500s proliferated physically and structurallythroughout Japan. The dynamic market economy dates from thesecenturies; the monasteries and the popular Buddhist movements unleashed thecommodity and financial networks which made Japan by the outset of theTokugawa unification a society of large population and economic prosperityon a level at least with any other part of the world. Zen, as a conservativeelite, was less involved in entrepreneurial activities than the Pure Land movements,but it too benefited materially from the expansion of wealth in whichmonasteries acted as the leading edge of economic growth. As the templesbecame rich, a superordinate market arose in sale of offices; by the 1380sabbots and senior monks (especially of the far-flung Rinzai Five Mountainsorganizations) were paying fees for their appointments. Since they often heldoffice for less than a year, and dispersed gifts and held lavish ceremonies atInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 341their accession, it is apparent that a great deal of wealth was being extractedfrom the monastic economy by these officials. The shogun began to rake offfees from certificates of appointment, and in the 1400s was inflating theturnover to maximize income from the monastic sector.13 The business atmosphereof these monasteries was so intense that the iconoclastic Zen masterIkkyu described the monks as more like merchants than Buddhist priests.The material success of Japanese Buddhism and its “corruption” were partof the same process. Spiritual careers blended with careerism in the pursuit ofpower and status, and of the material wealth which concentrated in the greatmonasteries to a greater extent than in lay society. Even the monks who weremost inwardly oriented toward pure religious experience were caught up in anorganizational dynamic which required them to compete for widening rewardsin terms of inflationary criteria of advancement. Enlightenment was becomingstructured by an expanding marketplace.Soto, whose niche was the small-scale rural monastery catering to the needsof the common people, abjured koan and emphasized the purity of meditation,although rigorous practice faded into ritual and scholasticism. Rinzai in contrastmade koan the very center of practice. In its elite monasteries, where layaesthetes merged with religious virtuosi, koan practice in effect became aliterary practice, based on the texts of the koan collections which becameprominent in Japan in the mid-1200s and 1300s (Dumoulin, 1988: 248–251;1990: 30–31, 47). The koan and their commentaries, written in elegant andparadoxical form so as to constitute meta-koan in their own right, were veryclose to poetry (if differing in the formal rules governing number of syllablesand the like). By the generation of Gido Shushin, a pupil of Muso Soseki andadviser to the Ashikaga shoguns, the koan form was being assimilated to thecomposition of secular poetry.Conflict over the place of koan went along with the changing externalfortunes of Zen. During the Sengoku period (1467–1580), the “Country atWar” when central political authority had collapsed, the abbots of Buddhistmonasteries were literally independent feudal lords, and the armies and hugefinancial resources of the greatest Pure Land orders held the military balanceof power. The worldly power of Buddhism tended to delegitimate it spiritually;and the military lords who finally reimposed secular control by a quasi-centralizedstate, from Oda Nobunaga to the Tokugawas, took steps to crush themonasteries’ power and confiscate their economic base. Zen, which as aconservative elite had stayed remote from the Pure Land radicals, remained inrelatively good graces politically; but it too was subjected to increasing governmentregulation. It was reduced in effect to an administrative branch of the342 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsstate church, used for enrolling the populace under approved religious practices.The fluidity of monastic careers which had once allowed creative crossoversamong lineage masters was gone; movement within career hierarchieswas restricted to bureaucratized channels. The choking off of Buddhism wasone reason why the most ambitious intellectuals had shifted by the secondgeneration of the Tokugawa regime into the Confucian schools and becomeexpressly anti-Buddhist.For those whose remained within Buddhism, eminence went to dissidentmasters such as Bankei Yotaku who repudiated the koan because of theirartificiality. Written in Chinese, with their subtleties packed into the nuancesof a classical language, the koan cut off Zen students from the masses. Bankeibecame a Rinzai evangelist, preaching to mass audiences and proselytizing thecommon people to realize the unborn Buddha mind (Dumoulin, 1990: 321–323). Recapitulating the Soto style, Bankei downplayed the distinctiveness ofenlightenment.14Tokugawa Zen underwent a crisis of bureaucratization, arising through thesheer size of the Buddhist establishment, and enforced by the government. TheTokugawas thoroughly recentralized the Buddhist orders after their period offeudal proliferation; every temple was made a branch subordinate to its headquarters,and that in turn to government oversight. In 1614 Buddhism wasmade the official state religion; every household was required to register asmembers of one of the recognized Buddhist sects.15 Along with responsibilityfor vast numbers of purely nominal adherents, this presented Buddhism withthe problem of control by an efficient and increasingly unsympathetic secularadministration. In 1627 controversy arose over a new regulation that abbotsof the elite Rinzai temples should have mastered the entire corpus of 1,700koan. The leading Zen master of that generation, Takuan Soho, protested thatsuch mastery was impossible and would vitiate the spirit of Zen enlightenment.On the other side, Takuan’s condemnation was called for by Suden, governmentalsupervisor of all Zen establishments (who was the original drafter ofthe 1614 religious regulations), and by Hayashi Razan, a former Zen monkwho had gone over to neo-Confucianism and was in the process of establishingan official Confucian college under the shogun (Dumoulin, 1990: 275; Sansom,1961: 70–74). The regulation was upheld; Takuan was sent into exile.High religious status—and along with it an honorable career positionending as abbot in one’s own right—involved the increasingly competitiveseeking of certificates of formal legitimation. It was this credential inflationand the accompanying jostling for organizational position which motivatedmany of the bureaucratic reforms and restrictions of the Tokugawa period.The requirement of learning 1,700 koan for the highest abbotships was partof this atmosphere. So too were reform efforts within Soto in the late 1600s,Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 343when collecting multiple enlightenment certificates was prohibited, so that adisciple could be dharma heir to only one master. In 1703 central authority inSoto was confirmed by the shogunal administration, and its rules of successionwere enforced by law (Dumoulin, 1990: 336).Koan practice became increasingly bureaucratized not only at the top butfor the rank and file as well. Hakuin, the last famous Rinzai master, sought toreinvigorate Zen in the early 1700s. Proselytizing among the common people,he opposed intellectualism as too elitist for these audiences. This intellectualismhe identified not with koan but with the practice of silent enlightenment andits doctrine of no-mind; this practice, he declared, along with the nembutsusyncretism that had crept into popular Zen, was responsible for the currentdecline of Zen in Japan (Dumoulin, 1990: 383–386). Fighting for his sect’sidentity, Hakuin stressed what was organizationally most distinctive aboutRinzai. Koan practice was something to be carried on everywhere, continuouslyoccupying one’s consciousness. To this end, Hakuin systematized koaninto sequences. Pursuit of freshness nevertheless led to another layer of routinization.Among his successors, the result was a scholasticism which categorizedkoan by form and content, making them into an educational curriculumthat could be pursued throughout one’s career. The issue of koan versus silentenlightenment recapitulated a conflict which had taken place in Chinese Zenduring the 1100s, at just the time when Ch’an was fading from social prominence(Dumoulin, 1990: 383). These were long-standing structural alternativesfor the meditation specialists: the elitist-intellectual path and the path ofassimilation to everyday life, including common work. In the Tokugawa a thirdpath emerged mixing the two: koan practice as an educational routine.The conception of enlightenment changed in correspondence with theseexternal changes in monastic careers. The old, undifferentiated conception ofenlightenment was increasingly refined. Distinctions were made between “little”and “great” enlightenment (Dumoulin, 1990: 139, 373). Masters imposedincreasingly stringent requirements. Hakuin, in the early 1700s, had a classicecstatic experience. Following normal procedure, he formed his enlightenmentverses for presentation, but several masters refused to confirm his experience;finally he submitted to a master who put him through eight months of koanmeditation, together with laughs, insults, and blows, before allowing him tocollect his own disciples.16 Merely solving one koan was no longer enough, asin the tales of the original Ch’an masters; a series of koan must be passed.Other forms of practice escalated as well. In the early 1700s we hear of monksundertaking well-measured ascetic feats, such as a strict 1,000–day retreat,which secured one’s reputation and resulted in invitations to head importanttemples (Dumoulin, 1990: 338).Hakuin eventually became famous, both as an organizational leader in the344 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathslast phase of Zen proselytization and as the creator of a new form of Zenexposition. His writings are meta-reflections on the process of solving koan.Hakuin writes about his personal experience, about the efforts and strains ofgoing through the koan training. He takes the reader into his confidence,leading one by sympathy into the path of following a similar training. Hakuinadopts the stance of the teacher encouraging a non-elite audience. Althoughhis medium is still the koan, the interaction of teacher and audience has shifteddrastically from the parrying of wits which made up the original materials forthe Chinese koan, and away from the witticisms by which the old commentatorshad set themselves as equals to the old masters whose doings they recounted.Historically, numerous procedures have led to enlightenment experiences.Dogen in 1225, soon after arriving in China, experienced enlightenment andreceived the dharma seal after a few weeks of intense meditation; the precipitatingmoment came when his master admonished a monk for falling asleepduring a midnight session: “In Zen, body and mind are cast off. Why do yousleep?” (Dumoulin, 1990: 56). Dogen had his enlightenment experience veryquickly, while on his visit to China with the intention of receiving a lineagetransmission to take back to Japan. Many Japanese sojourners in China at thistime similarly progressed rapidly to enlightenment, in contrast to the manyyears of training typical of enlightened masters during earlier, intensely competitivegenerations in Chinese Ch’an, or again during later periods in Japanesehistory. My point is not that the enlightenment experiences were not genuine,but rather that the contrasts are evidence that they were socially constructed.Muso Soseki (in 1305), walking under a moonless sky, was enlightenedwhen he tried to lean against a wall where there was none, fell down, and feltthe “wall of darkness” disintegrate; a few months later he received the seal ofenlightenment upon presenting his verses commemorating this event. Anothermaster, Shuho Myocho (in 1304), attained his enlightenment upon solving akoan, which left him covered in sweat and feeling that a barrier had beensmashed through. Ikkyu attained his while working on a koan when he wassuddenly startled by the cawing of a crow. Still another was enlightened whenhis dying master, asked for a last word, gave him a slap on the face. Anotherwas said to have experienced his first enlightenment at age 15 by falling downstairs. These paths include verbal realizations, with and without koan paradoxes,and in some cases a state of tension and preparation in intense meditation,precipitated by a physical shock. Some monks put themselves throughgrueling discipline, lengthy periods without sleep or food, sometimes sitting onpointed rocks, making themselves sick in order to abrogate normal consciousness.17 It was also possible to reach enlightenment simply by the practice oftranquil meditation.18 The tranquil paths to enlightenment appear to haveInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 345displaced the more spectacular ones as Zen became routinized and flamboyantrishi-like masters no longer commanded much social charisma.Such processes on the organizational plane do not exclude the reality ofthe religious experience of persons such as Muso or Hakuin. Historical andsociological writing inevitably becomes the external history of ideas and events.This is so even when written by sympathetic religious participants (such asDumoulin), not to speak of secular sociologists. It is the same for every religion.The Christians martyred for their faith in the early Tokugawa were, trueenough, actors and pawns in the political struggles of national unification; buton an inner level many of them must have experienced the gospel of love andsalvation, whose worth cannot be judged outside itself. Our histories lose thereligious dimension of such experience. The language of religious evocationand the language of scholarship tend to be mutually exclusive, separated by agestalt switch that defocuses the content of one from the other.Writers of history and sociology can take heart from the fact that thisprocess is not merely imposed from outside by secular scholars; it has happenedwithin the historical development of every religion. Leaders of the faith havebeen periodically aware of the undermining tendency of scholarship, even asit derives from one’s own sacred books. Islam, Christianity, Buddhism alike allwent through early struggles against intellectualism, and all gave rise to academictraditions. Without such displacements there would be little history ofphilosophy. The conflict cuts both ways. After the creation of a literate tradition,a permanent possibility in the space of religious positions is a movementof anti-intellectualism, whether in the direction of fideist return to commonsensicalreadings of the scriptures, or toward the mysticism of wordlessness.The dialectic does not stop here. The scholastic path is a permanent possibilityas well. Scholasticism provides organizational continuity and transmits legitimationand prestige; these advantages ensure that religious intellectualism willbe resumed again after every counter-movement.The “history of Zen” is a contradiction in terms. Zen is the sophisticatedlevel of awareness that arises from recognizing the gestalt switch betweenwords and the ultimate reality they try to describe. Nevertheless, enlightenmentexperiences do not arise of themselves. Falling down steps, receiving a slap onthe face, a sudden release from tense concentration are not religious experiencesuntil they are interpreted. That is why there is a network of Zen masters,passing along the sensibilities which shape future possibilities of experience.Zen enlightenment is stepping beyond words, but the Zen masters transformit into poems and imagery, thereby making a transient inner experience into apublicly accessible object. This is the path toward scholasticism, with its futurechains of verbal commentaries; but it is also the path along which other personscan find their own transient ineffable experiences.19346 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsA similar quality is found in the debates observed by Kenneth Liberman(1992) in Tibetan monastic practice. Here the contents are much more overtlyintellectual than in Zen, consisting in problems descending from the Abhidharmaand Madhyamika philosophies brought to Tibet from medieval India.As in Zen, what Tibetan debate encourages in practice is not intellectualinnovation (in fact, the same arguments have been used for a thousand years)but instead fluid engagement in the exchange. There is a premium on makingquick replies, on laying traps for one’s opponent through a series of questions,on springing triumphantly into the breach (also with shouts, gestures, andmusical percussion) when one’s opponent hesitates or breaks down. The coordinatedrhythms and emotional intensity make us aware that Tibetan debateis a ritual in the Durkheimian sense; specifically it is a ritual of membership inthe spiritual community of transverbal detachment, conferring marks of spiritualprogress.There is no religion without sacred objects, without symbols representingthe focus of attention and the distinctive sense of membership in the group; itis these symbols that set apart the experiences which are transcendent fromthose which are profane. And even when one’s purpose is to transcend thought,that trajectory can only be set in thought, and through the medium of symbolswhich represent the group and its history. Symbols are the residue and thecontinuity of experiences over time. They flow through individual brains,shaping their attention and emotions, setting up the possibility of transcendentprivate experience, and then bringing those experiences back into the networkof social relations which give them meaning, and which re-create the possibilityof other persons’ acquiring their own private experience.From the level of material organization, through the interpersonal networks,the flow of symbols and the building up of emotional energies, peakexperiences are fashioned. These same conditions undermine pure religiousexperience, bringing attention down to the mundanities of organizationalpower, the blandishments of material property, the displacements into scholasticismand intellectual discourse. Social reality is at once creating and bringingdown religious experience. The one flows into the other in waves, and peakand trough share aspects of each other. The same can be said in religiouslanguage: samsara is nirvana.Tokugawa as a Modernizing SocietyThe Tokugawa regime was a time of spectacular economic growth, taking offfrom the market relations established in the Buddhist economy of the previousperiod, and turning its confiscated wealth into secular channels. The governmentof the shogun was reestablished at Edo (Tokyo) at a symbolically sig-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 347nificant distance from the old site at Kamakura, where the Five Mountainstemples of the Zen hierarchy had formerly held sway. The shogun’s administration(bakufu) remained feudal in form, but became in substance an absolutistbureaucracy with a high degree of success in pacifying the aristocracy ina web of legalistic and status formalities. Military forces remained under thelords of the feudal domains; but loyalty was ensured by requiring the lords’frequent attendance at the court at Edo, while fragmentation at the lower levelswas cut off by withdrawing all samurai from living on the land and concentratingthem in the castle towns of the domains. Three great cities under thebakufu’s direct control became the nodes of economic and cultural life: Edo,which by 1700 had burgeoned into the world’s largest metropolis at 1 millioninhabitants; Kyoto, where most lords kept up an alternate establishment,paying pseudo-court to the ceremonial regime, and where the schools proliferated;and Osaka, the former monastery-citadel of the wealthiest Pure Landmovement, now the commercial hub of the Tokugawa economy.The Educational Marketplace and theIntellectual Desertion of BuddhismBuddhist intellectual and cultural domination was on its way out, but it shapedevents once more at the time of transition. By 1600, Zen had transformedJapanese culture by establishing an educational system. The system was twotiered.Popular elementary education was provided around the countryside bySoto temples, and the elite Rinzai monasteries offered advanced training (Dumoulin,1990: 261–262, 333–334). The latter diverged into various branchesor tendencies. In some places pure training in koan continued. At the leadingKyoto temples, aesthetic cultivation over the centuries had blended with seculartraining, nurturing painters, garden designers, tea masters, and even actors.Pupils, masters, and other inhabitants of the monasteries might or might notbe in clerical orders. Another branch of Rinzai education was more strictlytextual and academic. It too had become essentially secular in content.In the early Tokugawa, the Neo-Confucian contents of academic Zen weremobilized as a vehicle for revolt. Although some ideological strands of thismovement give the appearance of a shift from one religion to another, fromBuddhism to Confucianism and then to Shinto, such a formulation would bemisleading. There was no shift in official religious ideology; on the contrary,in 1614 (and more forcefully in 1638) Buddhism was made compulsory for allhouseholds, a regulation not dropped until Meiji times. Confucian ceremonieswere introduced here and there but, outside of a few centers of Confucian militancysuch as the Mito feudal domain, never became widespread. Neo-Confucianismgradually became the favored educational doctrine of the bakufu, but348 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathswas not officially required until the 1790s (and then only in the bakufu’s ownschools, a small portion of the whole), by which time it had long since goneout of style with the leading intellectuals. The only thing that can be called agenuine religious reformation was the promulgation of State Shinto during1868–1882; but after an initial struggle to confiscate Buddhist property andreturn monks to secular life, religious tolerance was quickly adopted (Kitagawa,1990: 164, 201–214; Collcutt, 1986). State Shinto turned out to be aminimalist version of the Shinto cult, and coincided with the full-scale secularizationand de-clericalization of the school system. What we see is a seriesof attempts by the government to prop up religious orthodoxy, but inconsistently,and with enforcement only at a pro forma level, while both the meansof intellectual production and the ideas receiving attention in most intellectualcircles drifted continuously away from organized religion.The key should be seen as the gradual secularization of the educationalbase. The earlier phases embody the same kind of process in which universitytrainedintellectuals during the European Renaissance, with the aid of newsources of political patronage, broke free from the clergy-dominated base andestablished their own secular schools. By the 1700s, leading Japanese intellectualswere promoting the independence of worldly secular studies in a fashionparalleling that of the philosophes of the European Enlightenment; still later,when the Meiji government took full control of public education, there was aphase of full-scale anti-clericalism when priests were displaced from the lowerreaches of teaching.When creativity came alive in Japanese philosophy after centuries of stagnation,it happened as a breakout from within Zen. That is to say, there wasa revolt within the religiously dominated educational establishment, and thereforea critique of the dominant religious ideology. The leading thinkers of theseearly generations—Fujiwara Seika, Hayashi Razan, and Yamazaki Ansai—allbegan their careers as monks, and the anti-Buddhist militancy of the latter twowas that of apostates breaking free. Seika was still a transitional figure, a Rinzaimonk who shifted emphasis to the Neo-Confucian part of the curriculum, butwithout disparaging rival emphases. Seika laid down the basis for the newnetwork trajectory when he became adviser to Tokugawa Ieyasu; his pupilHayashi after 1608 performed Ieyasu’s secretarial work, along with chiefBuddhist officials including the Tendai abbot Tenkai, and Suden, the supervisorof the Zen hierarchy. So far this was the traditional ministry of religiousaffairs, pressed into bureaucratic service for the now powerful shogunate; andit was this secretariat, under Suden, which drafted the 1614 order for allhouseholds to register under a branch of Buddhism. Hayashi broke onlygradually, establishing his independent Neo-Confucian school at Edo in 1630,three years after his fight with Takuan over the regulation of koan teaching.Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 349Even so, Razan taught in clerical robes and tonsure, indicating how closelyclerical status remained identified with the teaching profession. Ansai did notleave the monkhood until 1647, and opened his successful Confucian schoolat Kyoto in 1655. Hayashi’s school, headed in a hereditary line by his descendants,was elevated to an official “university” only in 1691, with an annualincome as a state-sponsored shrine. The new philosophy was not simply amatter of the new Tokugawa regime shifting from Buddhism to Confucianismin search of a new political legitimation, nor a revenge against Buddhismbecause of the military battles of the unification wars. Zen in any case hadstayed out of the fighting of the previous period. It was above all the popularIkko sect which had been the military threat, yet even Ikko received concessionsunder Hideyoshi.20Zen still exerted some attraction during the first generations of the Tokugawa.The samurai class did not immediately desert for the new ideologies.Contemporary with Hayashi Razan are Zen stars from samurai families suchas Takuan Soho.21 Another such is Suzuki Shosan, who abandoned the militarylife after the great battles of 1615 to become a monk. He promoted aninnovative direction in Zen, denying the significance of ritual, declaring that“working the land is Buddha practice,” and formulating an ethics for merchantswhich stressed the performance of work duties without greed. Suzuki’sdoctrines have been pointed to as a Buddhist version of the “spirit of capitalism.”22 In the generation 1665–1700 there appeared a major Zen figure,Bankei, who came from a family of ronin (masterless samurai) and convertedfrom Confucianism; his contemporary Basho was similarly from the ranks ofthe lower samurai, and though not a monk, he infused his haiku poetry withZen sensibilities. Still later, Hakuin was also from a samurai family.What we have is a conflict breaking out within the status group of Zeneducatedintellectuals. As usual, conflict fuels creativity simultaneously on allsides. In the long-term network (compare Figures 7.3 and 7.4), the period1600–1735 is much more populated by Buddhists of major and secondary rankthan the five preceding generations; it includes, in the mid-1600s, the firstfounding of a new Zen sect (the Obaku sect, brought by Chinese émigrés) sincethe 1200s. The generations which lead up to Hakuin are a typical buildup ofeminence within a creative network; and if Hakuin is the last gasp of Zen inits time of troubles, the pattern is in keeping with the principle that creativityresults from shifts in the underlying organizational base, both on the way upand on the way down.Fueling the revolt within the ranks of Zen was a conflict between itsaesthetic and academic branches. The elite level of Rinzai was largely secularizedalready. Appointments to top posts of the Five Mountains were in imperialhands, reserved for members of the highest aristocratic families (Dumoulin,350 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsFIGURE 7.4. TOKUGAWA CONFUCIAN AND NATIONAL LEARNINGSCHOOLS, 1600–18351990: 270). The worldliness of the Zen establishment undermined its religiouslegitimacy; some of the criticism, both by wandering monks and by the advocatesof neo-Confucian ethics, took the form of purification movements withinthe ranks. The Zen hierarchy had already been splintering in the 1400s and1500s, giving off separate lineages specializing in teaching purely aesthetic arts.A hierarchy of specialized tea masters arose alongside conventional enlightenedmeditation masters, eventually claiming precedence over religious and evenpolitical ranks (See Figure 7.3).23 The spread of aestheticism was muddying thestatus hierarchies; in the tea cult in particular, wealthy merchants from porttowns such as Sakai were mingling with, and even taking precedence over,prelates and warriors. The Neo-Confucians of the early Tokugawa were in partreasserting the ranking of samurai over aesthetic challengers, in part restoringmorality as the central criterion of religious life. The most important of theseearly Confucian schools, that of Yamazaki Ansai, had a militantly puritanicaltone, forbidding the composition of poetry, and condemning any emphasison calligraphic style as a frivolous distraction from the moral seriousness ofthe texts.The underlying dynamic of Tokugawa intellectual life was the expansionof educational markets. Zen education by no means disappeared after the greatmonastic properties were confiscated; the Soto elementary schools in particularflourished. Buddhist temples in total proliferated from some 13,000 to over460,000 (in the 1720s) in connection with the requirement that every familyhold a temple certificate; every sect expanded its academies for training priests(Kitagawa, 1990: 164; Dumoulin, 1990: 333; McMullin, 1984: 246). But thetemples were now tiny; cosmopolitan connections and competition over positionsdisappeared as temples were made hereditary family properties. Therewas no longer any centralized elite, no apex of the status hierarchy such ashad been constituted by the Five Mountains at the time of the Muromachishoguns. Many different cultural providers could find an audience. Amongthem, Ansai’s attack on aestheticism acquired many disciples, but it could notdefinitively prohibit or displace some other branch of the market from offeringaesthetic products. Indeed, one of the popular areas of specialization thatopened up soon thereafter was the academic study of literature, first Chinese,then native Japanese poetry. On these academic bases rode the philosophicalinnovations challenging Neo-Confucianism.Several different types of education developed.24 First in importance werethe private proprietary schools (shijuku), catering to the samurai class, thoughgradually amalgamating with wealthier commoners. Such schools were smallscale,consisting of lectures in an individual teacher’s home for pupils whobecame his personal disciples. This was the predominant form of schoolinguntil the mid-1700s, and it continued to hold its own despite the challenge of352 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsrival forms of schooling thereafter. Virtually all notable intellectuals wereteachers of proprietary schools.Official state schools, by contrast, grew very slowly. Before 1690 there wereonly a handful of such schools, under auspices of the feudal domains or of theEdo government. Thereafter came a modest growth (to a few dozen) until1770, followed by a considerable expansion to virtually every domain in Japan.Such schools had relatively little intellectual impact. Designed to occupy andcontrol the samurai class of each domain, they combined elementary andadvanced curricula in a prolonged drilling in literacy, the Confucian classics,etiquette, and stylized military arts. In the full development of the system, lowersamurai might be required to attend until age 24, higher-ranking nobles untilage 30 or even 36. Education here was an adjunct to hereditary rank, anextension of the elaborate etiquette which filled the lives of officials and headedoff potential military conflict. Education did not determine access to officialcareers, since higher positions were filled largely by hereditary rank and connections;failing grades were never issued, and school progress was reportedin a rhetoric of superlatives upon superlatives. The ritualism of schoolingmeshed with the administrative routine of formal requests and reports, bywhich documents were accepted only if they followed precise stylistic conventions.To tighten the system, in 1792 the bakufu made an effort to establishChinese-style examinations for appointments, but without much effect on theusual status criteria for officeholding.At the other extreme were elementary schools for commoners. Their originwas in the Buddhist religious schools. In the early 1600s half of the teachersat such terakoya were priests, and in the mid-1800s the proportion was stillaround 25 percent. The big takeoff took place in urban areas in the 1750s,resulting in widespread literacy and numeracy; by the 1840s a massive elementaryschool system had been developed at local initiative.With the exception of the proprietary schools, most of this expansion ofeducation had little direct effect on intellectual creativity. The outburst of newphilosophy was concentrated in the generations from the mid-1600s to themid-1700s, when there was still only a small number of schools. In the earlycreative period there may have been no more than a few dozen. But these madeup an intensely focused competitive network, structurally reminiscent of theformative period of the old Chinese philosophical centers in the Warring States.Kyoto around 1665 was acquiring the classic creative structure of a center ofintersecting circles of rival movements; in the next generation it was supplementedby network branches at Edo. The huge educational expansion of thelate Tokugawa would not be expected to do much positively for intellectualinnovation; its organizational base went far beyond the limits of the law ofsmall numbers, and it suffered from the stifling effects of bureaucratization,Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 353just as in the comparable expansion of Chinese schooling after the Sung. Theofficial Neo-Confucian orthodoxy decreed by the bakufu in 1790 (just beforeits attempt at a formalized examination system) was hard to put into effectamong independent intellectuals; but it was indicative of the mood of the times,when the entire structure was formalizing under its own massive weight.For the early period when education was just taking off, we should addschools of the specialized arts: the private teachers and academies of swordsmanship,painting, poetry, flower arranging, and the like which proliferated inthe 1600s. Strictly speaking, these were not part of general schooling but weremore of a continuation of the aesthetic high culture of the pre-Tokugawaperiod, expanding forms such as the lineages of famous tea masters. In the late1600s, at the time of Basho, there were some 700 haiku teachers in Kyoto,divided into rival styles and lineages (Moriya, 1990: 119; Maruyama, 1974:115). Such schools did not promote the kind of abstract thinking which is theterritory of philosophy, but their expansion reveals something of the underlyingstructure of cultural production. Many of the teachers were samurai, displacedfrom their feudal lords or blocked for promotion into higher officialdom byhereditary families. Teaching was one of the few careers which did not forfeitthe status honor of the samurai rank (as entering commerce would have); andthe audience for such teachers was not only other samurai but also theburgeoning population of the commercial towns.A domain school might hire several rival instructors to teach swordsmanshipto its samurai, each preserving his own ritual closure through oaths ofsecrecy. Despite the demilitarization of society—indeed, because of the shiftto purely ritualized peaceful status competition among the samurai—suchschools proliferated in the Tokugawa. Schools of swordsmanship were organizedaround lineages of masters, awarding certificates of proficiency to theirpupils, modeled on the Buddhist notion of secret transmission of supremeunderstanding to highly selected disciples. The fusion of Zen with samuraiculture which took place at this time was part of the increasing formalizationand scholasticizing of status rankings in both sphere.25 The eliteness of theseemblems of transmission was breaking down as certificates proliferated in averitable inflation of credentials. The proprietary schools went further, breakingwith samurai exclusiveness and offering open lectures to the public, withoutoaths of loyalty or secrecy (Nosco, 1990: 31). These schools thereby providedthe competitive public attention space within which intellectual creativity couldemerge.The status culture of the higher ranks was now offered in a competitivemarket, raising the standing of the wealthier urban classes. In the artisticschools, and in the proprietary schools of Chinese philosophy as well, commonersand samurai blended into a new cultural ranking. In connection with354 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthis cultural marketplace came an outburst of the publishing business: againstarting off in Kyoto, and expanding in the 1700s to Edo and Osaka, therewere hundreds of publishers turning out over 100,000 volumes per year.(Moriya, 1990: 115–117). Most of their content was not philosophy butpopular literature and religious tracts. Along with this came the mass marketfor entertainment in the theater and the mass production of art prints. Thefirst great flowering of this popular culture industry was the Genroku era(1688–1704), and it was approximately at this time that the creativity of thephilosophical schools also peaked.26The Network of Creative OppositionsConsider now the network pattern of philosophical innovation during theTokugawa.27 First came the Zen apostates. Institutionally, breakaway Neo-Confucianism became crystallized with the founding of the Hayashi school in1630. Over the next two generations, the Confucian network split into fourfactions, expanding to fill its now dominant attention space.The first of these was the Hayashi school itself. Increasingly defined in theeyes of the shogunate as the orthodox lineage, it maintained an importantpresence in the network down through the early 1700s. But its stance shiftedto the defensive against splitting movements which had made it the favoritetarget. Its last notable figure was Muro Kyuso, who spent his time counterattackingagainst a sea of troubles: Buddhism, Shinto, Yamaga Soko’s Bushido,Ito Jinsai, Sorai. In Muro’s generation, the Chu Hsi school had official supportfrom the shogun, but little else to uphold it.Second appeared the Wang Yang-ming (Yomei) school of Neo-Confucianism,represented by Nakae Toju on the heels of Hayashi Razan, and by Toju’spupil Kumazawa Banzan through the following generation. This was an easyand natural path to diversifying Neo-Confucian offerings, insofar as the WangYang-ming school was already available as a Chinese rival of Ch’eng-Chuorthodoxy. Against the orthodox dualism of li (principle) and ch’i (materialforce), Toju promoted metaphysical monism, which he expressed as the unityof mind with external nature. In good Neo-Confucian fashion, Toju supportedethical and social conclusions from his metaphysics: there is innate knowledgein the human conscience, and self-cultivation is equivalent to social action.Toju attacked Razan as merely parroting Neo-Confucian texts, without absorbingthe spirit of ethical practice. Banzan in turn became the first notableheretic attacked by the Hayashi family. As usual, a creative period was usheredin by its conflicts.Kumazawa Banzan used the slogan “unity of knowledge and action” toshift the emphasis of Confucianism to social and economic policy. He sharp-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 355ened the split between worldly Confucianism and the sage religion of Ansai,rejecting both puritanism and otherworldliness.28 The Yomei school became afavorite ideology of administrative reformers—a case of metaphysical idealismbeing used for practical activism, outflanking the dualist-materialist doctrinesof the conservatives. Yet this is not so much an anomaly when we comparethe similar use of idealist justification in Fichte’s reform policies.The significance of these new schools was also organizational. HayashiRazan, and a fellow student of Fujiwara Seika, Matsunaga Sekigo, had bothsought official sponsorship for their schools. Razan’s support at Edo was rathermeager and offhand at first (Ooms, 1985); Sekigo did better at Kyoto, underthe patronage of both the bakufu representative and the emperor. Nakae Tojuwas the first to establish a school of higher studies without official support. Itwas not particularly successful, in part because it was located away from thecultural centers of the main cities. The model was soon picked up at Kyoto,where fully independent schools were established by Yamazaki Ansai and ItoJinsai. Banzan promoted his position in the burgeoning market for education,organizing a clan school for a daimyo (feudal lord) and attempting a Kyotoschool in the formative period of the 1650s.The competitive educational market hit full stride with the generation of1665. Two more splits in the Confucian camp quickly appeared. YamazakiAnsai’s school at Kyoto became the greatest success of all, attracting 6,000disciples. Ansai attacked the Hayashi scholars as mere drudges, failing topractice what they preached. Ansai claimed to offer the pure Chu Hsi tradition,shorn of compromises and accretions. In this direction Ansai was primarily atextual scholar, editing the Confucian classics with their approved commentariesand limiting his pupils to a narrow set of works stressing morality anddecorum. Ansai’s forcefulness made Chu Hsi Neo-Confucianism into a fullfledgedreligious movement. He revived and stressed the “sage religion,” whichthe original Sung Neo-Confucians had borrowed from Ch’an; the move was anatural one for Ansai as a former Zen monk.29Ansai’s stance becomes clearer when we note his relations within thenetwork (Figure 7.4). Unlike most of the other Confucian branches of thesegenerations, he did not derive from the Seika-Hayashi line. Instead he hadan independent Confucian lineage, in the somewhat out-of-the-way Shikokuschool of Tani Jichu.30 Ansai crossed this line with his Zen heritage; in addition,he collaborated with the domain school of the Lord of Aizu, HoshinoMasayuki, an active promoter of scholarship at Edo. Masayuki represents theemergence of yet another institutional form of intellectual promotion, somethinglike an academy of noble patronage; in addition to Ansai, he collectedunder his wing Yoshikawa Koretaru, the first important reformer of Shintoideology along modern metaphysical lines, and also sponsored the Hayashischool to produce a chronology of the imperial family.356 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsMasayuki’s patronage academy is paralleled by another sponsored by hiscousin, the Lord of Mito, Tokugawa Mitsukune.31 At Mito, Mitsukune collecteda group of scholars for another massive historical project, in this caseto write the history of Japan from its legendary origins to the present, a workwhich went on for generations after Mitsukune’s death. In the Mito circle wefind a number of notable scholars, including the Ming refugee Chu Shun-suiand the Buddhist monk Keichu, who became the ancestor of the NationalLearning movement. There was, in short, an upsurge of intellectual statusemulation among the great lords. It became fashionable to promote newreligious ideologies; the Mito domain was among the most militant in attemptingto suppress Buddhism, while Lord Aizu meddled in the factional politicsof Shinto. The overall effect was to encourage the flow of scholarship inautonomous paths.Ansai took maximal advantage of the new prestige of scholarship, whichhe turned into a religion in its own right. He energetically explored twodifferent religious niches: reviving the Sung sage cult and then going on toformulate his own version of Shinto. Stimulated by his contact with Koretaruin the Aizu circle, Ansai extolled reverence as the principle which Shinto andNeo-Confucianism have in common, and equated the cosmogonic myths ofthe Nihon-shoki with Chinese cosmology. His followers venerated Ansai as aliving kami (god) and fitted out his school with initiation rites of an amalgamatedConfucian-Shinto cult.The fourth major school was created by Yamaga Soko, a former studentof Hayashi Razan. In the new educational system he represents a differentniche, having spent his early career as a military instructor in a domain school.In 1666 Soko formulated Bushido, the Way (do) of the Warrior. Samurai codeswere not new; versions had existed since the 1100s, stressing loyalty to superiorsunto death. Soko, however, was living in peacetime conditions, and heraised the question of what was the function of the samurai, since they did notwork. The answer was drawn from Confucianism: the samurai role was topunish people who transgressed moral principles.32Soko broke with both the Chu Hsi and Wang Yang-ming schools, ongrounds that their doctrines had brought not peace to the Sung but foreignconquest. Striking a new political note, he stated that since China had repeatedlybeen conquered but Japan never (and had in addition twice conqueredKorea), Japan was superior and had right to the title of Middle Kingdom. Theadulation of Chinese culture, which had shaped Japan from Buddhist timesthrough the Neo-Confucians, now began to be thrown off. It would be anerror of tautology to attribute this to an incipient nationalism in the society atlarge. The dynamic can be found within the new structure of Tokugawaintellectual competition. Soko carved out his position in opposition to thesurrounding schools of his time, above all to the Neo-Confucians, arch-adula-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 357tors of China. Most sharply, Soko was a direct counter to Ansai’s sage religion,rejecting meditation and seriousness as the basic moral principle.33Soko’s new position called forth a new metaphysic. Soko gave primacy tomaterialist monism and eliminated Neo-Confucian quiescence, holding that itis merely the motions of nature that produce good and evil. Soko wielded ashis main resource an increasing depth of scholarship. He undercut Neo-Confucianclaims of antiquity by noting that “the teaching of the sages consistsonly in rites and music.” Soko did not, however, dispense entirely with hisConfucian cultural capital; he found a new space within Confucianism byseparating the classics from their Sung accretions. From Soko came the Edoschool of kogaku, Ancient Learning. This represented simultaneously a movetoward traditionalism and antiquity, and a shift toward naturalism.By the end of the century, Neo-Confucianism was becoming old hat. Theolder networks continued, but their new offshoots were twisting the lineage ofcultural capital into new channels. Ansai’s acquaintance Kaibara Ekken pushedthe naturalist aspects of Chu Hsi virtually into empiricist materialism. Matter/energy (ch’i) was seen as fundamental, principle (li) merely derivative; theimportant thing was the accumulation of knowledge through research, whichKaibara carried out in the realm of medical botany. With Kaibara we meet anew phenomenon, a Japanese intellectual who is detached from any school,merely an outstanding individual with a unique position. The marketplace nowwas offering recognition for such individuals; rivals such as Dazai called himthe most learned man in Japan (Sansom, 1963: 87).The more influential, however, succeeded by establishing proprietaryschools. Of these the new leader was the Kyoto school, the Kogido, foundedaround 1662 by Ito Jinsai.34 Adopting the stance of Ancient Learning, Ito tooka crucial step: he separated values from cosmological principles. In Chu Hsi,li is simultaneously moral law and physical law. Although they are identical,the former aspect takes priority; the universe is regulated by sincerity. Thereis nothing like this in Western idealism; it would be equivalent to holding thatChristianity’s “God is love” provides a way of ordering and controlling thephysical cosmos by religious action. Chu Hsi’s cosmic anthropomorphism wasgrounded in the practice of the sage religion. Impurities and turbidity of thech’i are the source of human desire and hence of evil on the lower plane; thisis repaired by meditation on li, whereby the sage restores human and cosmicpurity. The Sung Neo-Confucians had adopted the technique and part of thedoctrine from Zen by identifying li with the Buddhist Original Nature; thechief difference was that instead of ultimate emptiness, the Supreme Ultimateis the world-logos, and this in turn is equated with moral sincerity.Ito Jinsai now broke the link. He attacked the practice of sitting in quiescence(meditation) on the principle (li) underlying all things: “In things, there358 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsare the principles of things. But a single primal material force is the basis, andprinciple is posterior to material force, ch’i” (quoted in Maruyama, 1974: 446).There is no single principle, but only the multiple principles of natural phenomena.The way is opened to develop cosmological or metaphysical principlesindependently of human nature. By the same token, ethics is freed up as aseparate realm of discussion. Ansai’s moral rigorism now appears as merelyinhumane. Ito Jinsai’s school became the linchpin of subsequent developments,organizationally and in network structure. The Kogido was imitated by otherinnovators, who founded proprietary schools that broke free from the Neo-Confucian pattern. Among Jinsai’s pupils were Keichu and Kada no Azumamano,who were instrumental in National Learning, as well as the leadersof the Kaitokudo merchant academy. Jinsai’s doctrines were systematized inthe next generation by his son Ito Togai; the school remained prominent insubsequent scholarship until 1871, when all Confucian schools were abolishedin favor of Western education.The 1665–1700 generation was the most creative in many centuries; altogetherit included five major philosophers (Ansai, Yamaga Soko, KaibaraEkken, and Ito Jinsai, as well as Bankei on the Buddhist side), plus twosecondary figures (Kumazawa Banzan and the Buddhist scholar Tetsugen).35The momentum of innovation continued in the following generation.The conservative path to innovation carried on. Jinsai had freed Confucianismfrom religion by shifting emphasis to the original texts, promotingnaturalism in the name of tradition. This opening was exploited most forcefullyby Ogyu Sorai. Sorai was in the center of power at Edo. Formerly a pupil ofthe Hayashi school, he had advanced to chamberlain of the fifth shogun,Yoshimune. Advance guard to Sorai’s position was his colleague in the courtbureaucracy, Arai Hakaseki, trained in the same lineage as Ito Jinsai, and incontact with the Mito scholars. Arai is an all-round Confucian scholar, butchiefly engaged with purely secular concerns of history, and above all practicalproblems of the fiscal condition of the government. Arai played down ideologyin favor of pragmatics. Holding Christian doctrine to be nonsense posing nodanger to the state, he saw less need for seclusion from foreign commerce.Ansai’s approach to history downplayed the omens of traditional Confucianannals in favor of a rational interpretation of events.Upon retiring from office in 1714, Sorai established his Edo school, whereCh’eng-Chu orthodoxy was definitely repudiated in favor of Ito’s kogaku(Ancient Learning). This move of rebellious philosophy into the seat of powerhad its risks, insofar as the Hayashi school had recently been elevated to astate shrine; but Sorai’s excellent government connections shielded him, andhis school soon became the center of intellectual attention.Sorai proceeded to take the distinction between Neo-Confucianism and theInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 359ancient texts as legitimation for radical revision of accepted principles. “TheWay” consists in human norms only, not in laws governing the natural world.Although valid norms are taught by sages, there have been no sages sinceancient times (a direct slap at Ansai’s Neo-Confucianism, in which everygentleman meditates to become a sage). This being the case, ethical beliefs area purely private matter. The only norms that can be generalized are those ofsocial ethics, which boil down to propriety and obedience to government. Fromthis Sorai drew radical consequences for current social policy. He suggestedeliminating social ranks, the fourfold order of samurai, farmer, artisan, andmerchant which had been justified as corresponding to the Confucian socialorder. Instead, he said, “All the people of the world are officials who assistthe ruling prince, who is the parent of the people” (quoted in Maruyama,1974: 92).The military samurai appeared to Sorai an outmoded group, whose troubleswere to be understood in terms of the mundane realities of modern economics.The samurai were becoming an impoverished class because they did not work,but lived on fixed stipends in the midst of a market economy.36 More generally,demand for goods was unlimited but supply was limited. The result wasincreasing prices, while the circulation of gold and silver pieces diminishedbecause of heavy debts. Sorai thought like an analytical economist, recognizingthat long-run adjustments were necessary. His proposal was to give samuraifiefs and make them live on the land, while fixing supply and demand byregulation and restoring frugality through sumptuary legislation. The entireeconomy was to be put into stasis; people’s movements were to be controlledby a registration system. Sorai’s view of economics led him to profoundlyconservative, even reactionary policies. But it was in keeping with his analyticalstyle that society should be regarded under the aspect of naturalistic order,with explicit recognition that the market, if allowed to operate, has principlesof its own. Solutions must be economically feasible ones, not merely edicts ofmoral exhortation or threats of military coercion. In Sorai’s own school hischief disciple, Dazai Shundai, a year after Sorai’s death (1728) reversed hismaster’s position to favor an economy based on trade rather than agriculture.With Dazai, the acceptance of an inevitable social order broke through intothe instrumental consideration of policy options. Although it was mercantilismrather than free trade which he favored, the intellectual basis was an analyticallyindependent economics.Sorai and his school raised philological scholarship to a value in its ownright. The break came under cover of ideological continuities from the past.Confucian legitimation continued to be claimed. The pathway was alreadyopened by previous scholars who had maneuvered their own positions into anorthodox light by selective attention to their favorite classics. For Chu Hsi360 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsthese had been the Doctrine of the Mean and the Great Learning, hithertoobscure ancillaries to the old Book of Rites; for Jinsai the favorite vehicle wasthe Analects; for Sorai it was the Six Classics made canonical by Confucius.In the hands of older scholars, mere verbal similarity and the obscurity ofmeaning in ancient texts were used to justify the desired new readings. By theearly 1700s, three generations of Japanese schools had built up a criticalstandard of textual scholarship, motivated by open competition among classicaland Sung Confucian factions. Sorai simultaneously invoked respect for thesages while distancing them from modern conditions. Since the world andlanguages had changed, the only way to recover the ancient Way was to masterancient language and adhere to the old rites and music. China had obviouslychanged, and therefore deteriorated, over time. But one cannot simply imitatethe past; what is recorded in texts is to be treated as history.37 Wielding thisweapon, Sorai recognized that Sung Confucian teachings stemmed from Buddhism.Similarly, the Shinto put forward by its modern advocates did not existhistorically, as shown in ancient texts. Sorai declared that Shintoism had beeninvented by Yoshida Kanetomo in the 1480s. Sorai drew a policy consequencefavorable to his bakufu connections, rejecting even nominal sovereignty of theemperor. Dazai was even more dismissive: “Shinto is no more than the Wayof the sorcerers. It is not a matter to be studied by a gentleman” (Maruyama,1974: 154).In their utilitarian emphasis on worldly practicality and rejection of metaphysicalspeculation about heaven’s law, Sorai and his school resemble Europeanintellectuals of the Enlightenment. Sorai is often compared to Machiavellior Hobbes; one might also say that he is something like a mixture of Voltaire,with his anti-clericalism and his appeals to the rational absolutist despot, andRousseau, with his reasoned rejection of the evils of market civilization. Thisis so not because the European and Japanese thinkers are interchangeable asindividuals, but because their respective situations contained similar sets ofingredients. Defining what these were must be deferred until we have furtherpieces of the puzzle in hand.The Divergence of Secularist Naturalism and NeoconservatismSorai’s success signaled a near-revolutionary collapse in the popularity ofNeo-Confucianism. The Hayashi school was almost deserted until the periodof enforced orthodoxy at the end of the century. Ansai’s sage religion fell to aminor conservative sect. In the 1730s and 1740s, Sorai’s disciples dominateddiscourse. The price of becoming a scholarly hegemon was paid; creativitydropped, and scholarly specialization and routine set in. After 1750 the Soraischool became embroiled in minor disputes with the Ito school; many thinkersInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 361adopted an eclectic path amidst the issues, further muddying the sharp edgesof doctrine which had once characterized the systems in their creative periods.In these two generations the naturalistic line of thought inspired moreradical innovations. The most extreme of these, isolated in the network ofFigure 7.4, did not rise to more than secondary eminence in the attention space.Ando Shoeki, a medical scholar living in the isolation of northern Honshu,pushed the Neo-Confucian kigaku (doctrine of material force, ch’i) to virtualmaterialism. He was the only Tokugawa scholar to criticize explicitly the feudalorder; his stance was a Rousseau-like condemnation of samurai, priests, andmerchants alike as socially useless. At the other end of Japan, Miura Baiyenat Nagasaki promoted a dialectical logic of things, advocating experimentalmethods and investigating economics.Closer to the center, naturalism invaded the Kaitokudo, the Osaka academyestablished in the 1720s for merchant families, explicitly breaking thesamurai monopoly on officially sanctioned education. Its founders were pupilsof both Ito Jinsai and the Ansai lineage of neo-Confucianism, and the Kaitokudoin its early years was timidly eclectic (Najita, 1987; Najita and Scheiner,1978: 23–43; Ketelaar, 1990: 19). In the next generation a pupil, TominagaNakamoto (son of one of the wealthy merchant patrons of the academy),rebelled against this eclecticism, criticizing Confucianism along with all otherreligions in favor of a “religion of the facts.” He was expelled, but by midcenturythe naturalist attitude had become dominant at the Kaitokudo. The chiefteacher, Goi Ranju (a grandpupil of Ito Jinsai), launched an empiricist attackon Buddhist doctrines, using knowledge of science and astronomy against thecosmology of the world-centering Mount Sumeru and the layers of hells andparadises. The next leader of the Kaitokudo, Nakai Chikuzan, combined attackon Buddhist irrationality with the study of economics and advocacy of thevirtue of the merchants’ profession. Here we see the European Enlightenmentstyleintellectual movement in full force, attacking religion as outmoded. Thatthe merchant academy chose Buddhism to attack, one hundred years after theConfucian scholars had already dispensed with it, probably had to do with thedifferences in social milieux. Confucian schools were above all identified withthe samurai, while Buddhism still remained the belief of the common people;and it was also no doubt safer to attack popular Buddhism than to take onConfucian sage religion.A connection was now established with Miura Baien, who sent his pupilsto study at the Kaitokudo; several became teachers there, shifting the emphasisto empirical science, especially astronomy. The outstanding pupil producedby the Baien-Kaitokudo connections was Yamagata Banto; in 1804 he propoundedheliocentric astronomy as a touchstone, an epistemological image ofobjective science decentered from merely human biases. Yamagata’s division362 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsof all knowledge into pre- and post-astronomy was not accepted by theKaitokudo, but his empiricist secularism found new bases. Yamagata becamehead of a branch house of a big Osaka merchant, where mathematical andfinancial specialists were becoming in-house intellectuals. One of these, KaihoSeiryo, built an empirical science upon the accounts of the great Osaka merchanthouses and his travels to witness their operations. Kaiho was a veritableAdam Smith.38 He equated li (principle) with the balance point of an exchange,recognizing a natural law governing buying and selling which is accessible byrational calculation. Everything is a commodity and has its exchange value. Inthe style of the radicals of the European Enlightenment, Kaiho rejected metaphysicsin favor a materialist monism, critiquing as well Confucian traditionalismand the simplistic ethical maxims of the samurai class. Stratification isthe result of historical conditions, he said, as can be seen by the fact that thereare no classes among the Ainu of Hokkaido. Workers are best motivated byincentives rather than punishment. With Kaiho, we have class-conscious advocacycombined with analytical secularism.By the generation of the early 1800s, the Kaitokudo had become upstagedby even more militant offshoots. A former pupil, Oshio Heihachiro, led hisown small school of some 20 pupils in setting fire to Osaka in 1837 in aneffort to provoke a general uprising against the bakufu. Another descendantof the Baien-Yamagata lineage, Ogata Koan, founded the Tekijuku in 1838close by the Kaitokudo, as a school of Dutch Learning devoted to Westernmedical science. From this school came many of the militants and intellectualleaders of the Meiji restoration, including Fukazawa Yukichi, who introducedWestern liberalism and positivism in the 1860s.Until the mid-1800s, these Osaka lineages were out of the mainstream ofattention, which remained focused at Kyoto and Edo. The more spectacularsuccess in the attention space broke off from the Ito Jinsai and Sorai networks.In the familiar dialectic of creative innovation, this move now took a contrarydirection. The pseudo-conservatives of the Japanese Enlightenment were callingforth an opposition of genuinely reactionary conservatism. To set the stage,we must consider the fact that Sorai separated public and private spheres: thatis to say, public issues of law were to be treated by different standards thanprivate matters of ethical belief. Thus, in the famous law case of 1702, when47 ronin (masterless samurai) avenged the death of their former lord by killingone of the shogun’s officials, Sorai held that their adherence to the samuraicode of ethics was irrelevant, and they should be punished for breaking thepublic law.39 Sorai’s differentiation of intellectual realms went along with acorresponding shift in the structure of education as well. The teaching ofnon-orthodox religious doctrines was condoned, so long as it took place inprivate schools. In his own school, specialization emerged between thoseInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 363concerned with public matters (primarily economics and governmental policy)and those devoted to the scholarship as a cultural realm in its own right.Instead of religion and ethics, however, the focus of the latter was literatureand philology. This continued the main textual concerns of Confucian literati;it also held potential for evoking disputes between Japanese and Chineseliterature, as well as the long-standing line of cleavage between aesthetic andmoral-religious values.From literary disputes developed the ideological movement of NationalLearning. Catching the center of attention was Kamo Mabuchi. He derivedfrom network connections which brought together the literary and philologicalside of the Sorai lineage with the growing militancy of Shinto priests. Amonghis teachers there was already a critical stance toward Confucian philosophy.Hori Keizan was explicitly hostile to the concept of li, precisely because it wasan abstraction and therefore applicable in a meaningless fashion that did notexplain anything concrete.40 The philosophical defense of particularism wasbuilding up. Mabuchi was spurred to bring out its larger significance on theoccasion of a dispute in the early 1740s over the teaching of poetry at the courtof the shogun’s son. The public affairs wing of the Sorai school, as well as theneo-Confucian line descending from Arai Hakuseki, attacked poetry as useless.The Shinto priest Kada no Azumamaro, a former pupil of Ito Jinsai, hadlectured on poetry to the Edo court; since Mabuchi was also his pupil, thepro-poetry faction at court asked Mabuchi to prepare a defense of poetry, andrewarded him with an official stipend to teach Japanese poetry.Mabuchi promoted national poetry as the linchpin of a new intellectualalliance. Confucian interpretations, he said, must be removed from obscuringthe pure development of Japanese literature; scholarship must approach itsmaterials through the Japanese language. It was much the same break as tookplace in Europe when the Romanticist movement repudiated Latin as thelanguage of scholarship and replaced it with the study of national languages.Mabuchi connected this claim for the scholarly autonomy of his specialty withthe study of the ancient Shinto chronicles and mythologies. In part this is tobe seen as a move in the growing mobilization of Shinto priests; but it alsohad roots in the expansion and accumulation of textual scholarship throughthe previous three generations. The individual retrospectively named progenitorof National Learning, Keichu, was a Shingon monk in the 1665 generation,hired by the Mito school to work up a scholarly commentary on the Man’yoshu(the ancient poems in the waka style), which had first been collected in thelate 700s. Such texts had been written in archaic Sino-Japanese from theperiod when writing was not yet standardized, and hence were long sinceunintelligible; explicating them became a new specialty, which Mabuchi continued(Nosco, 1990: 9, 57–58).364 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsHere it is worthwhile to pause and survey the development of Shintoconsciousness. Although very ancient, Shinto was always a sidelight to themain intellectual action, and never was able to sustain any independent developmentin the networks until it was finally adopted by a branch of theTokugawa intellectuals. The reason for this was fundamentally organizational.Shinto was not one church but a rubric covering thousands of local shrineswith their particularistic deities. Its material endowments were simple; therewere no distinctive cult objects, no representations which could sustain anartistic network, no body of textual doctrines on which an educational systemcould be built in the fashion of the Buddhists. Shinto priests descended fromparticular clans, and each local shrine was inherited within a family; hencethere was no wide network of recruitment or universalistic system of trainingas in the Buddhist monasteries. Shinto was carried through the centuries largelyby the favorable policies of Buddhists, at first because Buddhists penetratingthe countryside made use of indigenous shrines as material bases and locallegitimation, then more generally by the policy of maintaining favorable connectionswith the imperial court, which owed its ceremonial position above allto its connection with a few of the most famous Shinto shrines. Buddhismhelped give the Shinto kami (indigenous gods) a wider intellectual significance,at first by interpreting them as allies or manifestations of the Buddhas andBodhisattvas. At periods of political upheaval affecting the religious establishment,Shinto downplayed its particularism and portrayed its doctrine ashaving larger moral and metaphysical significance.41 As a generalized doctrine,Shinto was parasitical upon Buddhism. Such organizational dependence promotesdoctrinal syncretism or at best thinly disguised borrowings.In the early Tokugawa, the anti-Christian regulation requiring every familyto register with a Buddhist sect was applied to Shinto priests as well. Althoughthis wounded the status claims of the Shintoists, it also vastly improved theirorganizational connections. Shinto shrines were put under the same regulatoryoffice as Buddhism, and brought into contact with the maneuverings of shogunaladministration as well as realignments of the intellectual networks. WhenBuddhism suffered a drop in its upper-class patronage as a result of theNeo-Confucian revolt, Shinto suddenly had an opportunity to claim its place.The Watarai family of Ise now began to criticize Buddhism as a worse evilthan Christianity, and proposed instead a Shinto-Confucian alliance. A morepolicy-oriented nationalist Shinto began in the Mito school, the most militantantagonist of Buddhism. Lord Mito’s cousin and rival, Lord Aizu, promotedhis protégé Yoshikawa Koretaru to be the bakufu official in charge of Shinto,and attempted to elevate the latter’s Yoshida branch of Shinto into a nationalorthodoxy within Shinto. Shinto-Buddhist philosophical syncretism was rejected.42 In its place Koretaru interpreted the kami as Neo-Confucian li, per-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 365sonalized manifestations of the universal metaphysical principle (Kitagawa,1987: 164). Formerly dispersed and localized, Shinto was now becomingcentrally organized for a fight. Sensing the opportunity, in this generation tooAnsai proposed his own version of Shinto from the Neo-Confucian side.The situation did not remain static. The Neo-Confucian school came underattack from the secularists, and its influence collapsed. Now Sorai’s contemporaryKada no Azumamaro removed Shinto from under the wing of Confucianism,and his pupil Mabuchi legitimated the separation intellectually witha full-scale ideology of the superiority of Japanese studies.43 In the next generation,National Learning (kokugaku) was elevated by Motoori Norinaga(another pupil, along with Kamo Mabuchi, of Hori Keizan) into a doctrineclaiming to replace Confucianism of every variety. Norinaga’s school happenedto be near the Ise shrine; in this way he met Mabuchi on his pious travels,enrolled as his pupil, and sustained correspondence with him. Since Ise wasbecoming the center for pilgrimages organized by a national network, Norinagaacquired a large number of pupils at his private school.Norinaga turned National Learning into a philosophically sophisticateddefense of particularism. He rejected all metaphysics as foreign intrusions.Buddhist and Confucian doctrines alike, he declared, are full of logical contradictions;because they are formulated as universalistic philosophies, they areopen to refutation. By the same token, the syncretism of Shinto with Neo-Confuciancategories is unwarranted.44 Nor is Confucianism morally superior; itsdoctrines, in Norinaga’s eyes, reduce to Machiavellian amoralism and areinferior to Japanese practices. Norinaga elevated the historical viewpoint intoa criterion by which all rationalisms, both neo-Confucian and post-Confucian,can be rejected. His own textual specialty was the Kojiki (Records of AncientMatters, compiled from ancient annals and myths in 712), shifting from theliterary texts of Mabuchi and his predecessors to a religious text which Norinaganow endowed with scriptural authority. There is no way to rationalizethe age of the gods; one can only start with revelation as a miraculous intrusioninto the mundane world. Heaven, nature, and human affairs are all due to thekami; but these are particularistic and ineffable, not principles accessible toreason.Norinaga’s position is a combination of positivist historical scholarship andtheism. The kami can only be defined as “anything which was outside theordinary, which possessed superior power or which was awe-inspiring” (Kitagawa,1987: 165). Here we have an explicit parallel to Rudolf Otto’s definitionof the holy. Norinaga is like the Christian neo-orthodox theologians at the turnof the 1900s, in the fashion of Schweitzer and Barth, using careful textualscholarship to show that the original faith was not the ethical principles andIdealist metaphysics beloved of liberal Protestants. There is no naturalistic366 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathshalfway house between secularism and religion. In a fully secular intellectualethos, religion can indeed be defended, but only by showing forth religioustradition in its full particularism and non-rationality.In the early 1800s, a contact of the later generation of Norinaga’s lineage,Hirata Atsutane, elevated the militancy of the Neo-Shintoist movement stillfurther. Shinto organization itself, he declared, must be purged of the tinges ofsyncretism, in both Ansai’s Suika Shinto with its Chinese influences, andYoshida Shinto with its Buddhism. Hirata was the last significant thinker inthe direct lineage of the Ansai school, which had been intellectually dormantfor generations. He took most of his inspiration from Norinaga, while downplayingthe poetic-historical scholarship in favor of political-religious propaganda.Later in the century the Hirata school became known as nationalistextremists fulminating against Westernization. Hirata helped prepare the wayfor this escalation of intellectual experimentation. He had already rationalizedShinto by introducing a monotheist “heavenly center lord” above Amaterasu,the sun goddess, and incorporating notions of creation and eschatology takenfrom Christian sources filtering in with Dutch Learning. Despite his claims,Hirata was no deep-rooted reactionary but was a modern neoconservative. HisChristian counterparts may be found in France and England in the samegeneration.Conservatism and Intellectual CreativityThroughout the history of Japanese intellectual networks we witness a conservativepath to innovation. The ideological trajectory of Tokugawa thoughtpointed backwards in time. The Neo-Confucian revolt against Zen was legitimatedby a nationalist note; Hayashi Razan pointed out that the Shinto shrineshistorically predated the import of Buddhism, although he twisted this into asupport for Chu Hsi by equating li with the do (way) of the kami. Ansaiclaimed to purify Japanese Neo-Confucianism of the compromises left by theHayashi school. Yamaga Soko’s Bushido school and Ito Jinsai’s Ancient Learningleaped over Sung Neo-Confucianism by appealing to earlier Confuciantexts. This was not simple traditionalism. The progression was initiated bycontinual sharpening in the standards of scholarship, and energized by contemporaryconflicts among rival intellectuals. These conflicts built up an accumulationof technical tools and conceptual innovations. Jinsai and Sorai, whojustified their work as purified Confucianism, differentiated cosmology fromethics, public affairs from private sensibilities; their network fellows recognizedand critiqued abstraction as distinct from concrete principles. The ensuingwave of criticism arising against the naturalism of the Sorai style furthersharpened philosophical acuteness; the limits of rationalism were explicitlyInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 367recognized along with the claims of particularism. By the time of KamoMabuchi and Motoori Norinaga, historical criticism itself was asserted as anindependent and in some sense overriding ground for knowledge.It is not simply that Neo-Shintoism had to be raised from inchoate rootsinto a formal doctrine in the intellectual attention space. Its intellectual substancewas created in the process of scholarly accumulation over the generationsof sustained argument. And it rested more specifically on the differentiationof scholarly specialists, first in received Chinese texts, then going on toexplore classical and then national antiquity in a fashion that parallels theEuropean sequence of medieval Neoplatonists and Aristoteleans, RenaissanceHumanists, and eventually the Romanticist-nationalist scholars of the 1700s.The fact that the Göttingen school of philologists, along with Winckelmannand the brothers Grimm, were contemporaries of the secularists of the FrenchEnlightenment should not surprise us; we see the same pattern in Japan, wheresecularist-naturalist and antiquarian-nationalist movements were contemporaries,and even network cousins. This is not a matter of intellectual lifeproceeding in cyclical reactions; rather, creative periods are always structuredby contemporary oppositions. There is a common denominator on the level ofunderlying organizational bases: in both Japan and Europe these movementsrest on the expansion of a cultural marketplace, combining literary publicationand formal schooling. Modern conservatism everywhere arises from the secularizationof society—in the sense of the declining institutional weight ofreligion—and the emergence of an autonomous educational system.45Japanese neoconservatism is a phenomenon of modernity. To be sure, thepolitical weight that it acquired in the overall balance of factions is almostunique and must be accounted for by conditions specific to Japan. But modernEuropean history is not without its neoconservative and past-extolling ideologies,constructed precisely with the intellectual tools of modern sophistication.There is a more general lesson. Conservatism as an ideology is always adeception. There is no such thing as an appeal to the unreconstructed past.The very concepts of tradition and of particularistic faith echo the antithesesby which they were shaped. Conservatism, like everything else in the intellectualworld, is born out of conflict. And even when the combination of religious-political alliance with an authoritarian regime would seem to make anyinnovation in the realm of ideas illegitimate, innovation is not choked off.As soon as organizational conditions are assembled for sizable bodies ofliterate specialists to communicate about their affairs, the inherent fractionationof the intellectual attention space generates differences in emphasis. Theseare constructed out of whatever accumulated textual material is available. Itmatters not that the texts themselves may be ancient and particularistic, orthat their overt content may adamantly assert immutability and oppose inno-368 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsvation. Innovation is easily cloaked in the guise of tradition—all the more sowhen it occurs by opening levels of abstraction and lines of questioning thatare not included in the classical categories or antitheses, and hence passunnoticed until they become deeply rooted.In world perspective, the drive toward secularization of education oftencomes not from a strong anti-clerical or secularist party, but from the fact thatrival religious conservatives fight to block one another’s control. Thus inEngland during 1830–1870, pressure built up to remove the universities fromchurch control in a struggle among rival factions within the established Churchof England (see Chapter 12).46 In the Tokugawa, de facto secularization of theeducational market was promoted because the rival Confucian proto-religions,as well as state-mandated Buddhism, were so widely at odds. In the Meiji, theimposition of State Shinto was in effect a compromise, window dressing fornearly total secularization of education and the effective separation of stateand church. It elevated the flimsiest and least organized of Japanese religionsinto a cult devoted solely to the emperor (who continued to be a figureheadwithout influence on the political elite), while cutting off the Confucian schoolsof the intellectuals, and the Buddhism of the masses, from influence over statecultural policy. Here again traditionalist conservatism did not prevent massivestructural innovation, and even provided ideological cover.The Myth of the Opening of JapanThe Meiji restoration and the opening of Japan to the West is by no meansthe turning point of Japanese history. Japan was not so very secluded fromoutside resources; its elites were merely in a position to be very selective aboutwhat they included. In fact, émigrés continued to bring in cultural imports. Inthis way in the 1650s there arrived the Obaku sect of Zen, as well as theChinese dynastic historian (98 in Figure 7.4) who was invited to join the Mitoschool. Western learning was available through Chinese contacts, as well asthrough the channel of Dutch Learning, which in Eurocentric retrospect hasreceived more attention than it deserves. If these materials had only minorimpacts on Tokugawa intellectual life, it was because the creativity of indigenousnetworks was already quite high enough to fill the attention space.Secularization of the Means of Intellectual ProductionThe major institutional structures of modern Japanese society were alreadylaid down in crucial respects by the eve of the Tokugawa. Market capitalismwas accelerated by the Meiji opening, not created by it. The same may be saidfor secularization. As sociologists of religion know from the perspective of theInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 369late 1900s, secularization is not an all-or-nothing shift in the realm of belief;it does not require that a majority of the populace reject the supernatural.What is more important is that an institutional watershed is crossed whenthe means of cultural production become preponderantly independent of thechurch. Once this institutional shift takes place, intellectuals—of all peoplethose most directly concerned with the conditions of authority inside the sphereof cultural production—defend the autonomy of their own ideas. This doesnot require that many (or indeed any) intellectuals become militant atheists;rather they open a sphere of activity which they recognize as autonomous fromultimate religious commitments, and attack intrusions in this sphere as illegitimate,just as Ito Jinsai and Sorai did in the period around 1700.Several forces press in the direction of secularization in this institutionalsense. (1) An independently staffed governmental administration develops, nolonger dependent on clergy for literate skills. This divide had been crossed byaround the second generation of the Tokugawa. (2) A mass publishing marketarises. It can of course sell religious tracts. When it is not controlled by churchproducers, their wares enter into competition with all manner of other massentertainment.47 Such a market was very much in evidence by 1665–1700. (3)Schooling becomes independent of the church. This mass educational market,which started up with the proprietary schools of the mid-1600s, had burst outinto a mass system for all social class levels by 1735 or 1765. That is not tosay that church schooling did not exist, especially in the rural areas, or thatsome of the proprietary schools did not attempt to make themselves intoreligious cults. The distinctiveness of the expansion of Japanese secular educationwas that it happened primarily through the private marketplace; governmentschools were a rather small and late part of the expansion.What the Meiji regime did in the realm of secularization was to implementmass public education under government control. Japanese society now underwenta phase of de-clericalization in the strong sense of the term. There wasa period of active defrocking of Buddhist monks, the suppression of Confucianschools, and the creation of a mass school system under governmental control(Ketelaar, 1990; Collcutt, 1986). These actions of the various parties in thede-clericalization struggle were well within the range of conflicts over thestaffing of public education and the tax privileges of the church which occupiedBismarck’s Kulturkampf, the French Third Republic, or Italy following itsunification. Again the coincidence of dates with Japan is striking.The ethos of intellectual life established in the Tokugawa educationalmarketplace flowed without much of a hitch into the new conditions of masspublic education. The proprietary schools had become secularized and politicized;their orientation toward public policy, ranging from economics to theutilitarian engineering of social arrangements, carried over directly into the370 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsperiod of explicit reform. Such had been the prime interests of Japaneseintellectuals in the preceding two generations of Tokugawa, from 1800 onward.The one truly significant structural change of the Meiji, as far as intellectuallife was concerned, was the importation of the European (which is to sayGerman) university. Why should this be important? I have noted the similarityof Tokugawa intellectuals to European philosophes of the 1700s: their orientationtoward practical affairs or to literature and their disparagement ofmetaphysics and abstract philosophy. The Enlightenment intellectual style wasthat of non-academic intellectual networks, antagonistic to the philosophicaldiscourse that had grown up in connection with theology in the church-dominateduniversities. Abstract philosophy reemerged in Europe only with theGerman university reform in the generations of Kant and Fichte. Tokugawaintellectuals resemble those of Enlightenment Europe before the penetration ofGerman university reform.School teaching provided a more central base for philosophical creativityin Japan than was the case in Europe, but this differed from the universitystructure in two crucial respects. Japanese schooling was largely undifferentiatedbeyond the elementary level. The reformed European university, in contrast,instituted a hierarchy of topics and levels of training, between secondary/preparatory studies and advanced training; at the highest levels, scholarswere trained to become advanced teachers in their own right, and to displaytheir competence by the publication of independent research. It was thishierarchic structure which provided insulation for university specialists fromthe practical or literary concerns of the lay world, and thus encouraged thedevelopment of philosophical abstraction. The second unique aspect of theEuropean university enhanced the tendencies of the first: it is that the universitieswere organized as a collegial group. The university professor was notan individual teacher but a member of a teachers’ guild, which claimed monopolyrights to certify new members. This guild structure, which in Europehad its roots in the medieval guilds as applied to the academic vocation,supported collegial autonomy (Huff, 1993); indeed, its rites of passage in theform of the dissertation or Habilitationsschrift emphasized the membershipdefiningsignificance of specialized and esoteric intellectual production. InEurope, with the long development of struggles among the branches of theuniversity faculty, the self-conscious identity of philosophy was connected withits independence of theology, its appropriation of a distinctive metaphysicaland epistemological turf.It was these academic structures which Japanese education largely lacked.Japanese schools were organized around individual teachers, without a collectiveguild organization. The predominant form in the Tokugawa, the Neo-Con-Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 371fucian academy, had begun with the fusion of philosophy and theology in thesage religion. The institutional revolution carried out by Jinsai and Sorai brokewith religious concerns; the result was the Japanese version of the Enlightenmentintellectual, not the equivalent of Kant or Hegel. The lack of autonomousuniversity guild structures reinforced the propensity of Japanese intellectualstoward a politicized stance. Given the differences in content, the late Tokugawais full of equivalents of the non-academic European intellectuals of that period.The predominant style is the parallel to Rousseau, Marx, and Mill, the nonacademicizedbranch of intellectuals in the West. Political and social activismon the part of intellectuals is not distinctive to the West; its uniqueness is toadd the intellectual stance of the university.As if in experimental proof of this thesis, the introduction of the universityinto Meiji Japan resulted in an outburst of abstract philosophy. This was notmerely a matter of importing European ideas along with the university structure.The philosophical effects of the introduction of the university into Japantook two generations.48 In the first generation, 1865–1900, Japanese intellectuallife was overwhelmed by European idea imports. In Figure 7.5 thisgeneration has no thinkers of outstanding originality. The predominant linesof thought were materialism and evolutionism. Nishi Amane, the pioneer ofWestern philosophy in Japan, introduced an eclectic mixture of British utilitarianism,Mill, and Kant. Others brought in Comte, Haeckel, Spencer, andLotze. Weaker at first, but growing in influence by the end of the century, wereimporters of Idealism, variously in the version of T. H. Green (Onishi Hajime)or a combination of Hegel with Amida Buddhism (Kiyozawa Manshi). Theimitativeness and unoriginality of this generation are typical of idea importers.When we compare other periods of world history when the ideas from a deepintellectual lineage are imported into another region, the striking feature ofMeiji Japan is how brief was the period of subservience to foreign imports.Such periods (early medieval China under Indian Buddhist imports, RenaissanceEurope under the revival of classical antiquity) typically take some fourto six generations before indigenous creativity takes off.49 In Japan, however,major new thinking broke out as early as the second generation, with the Kyotoschool of philosophy.As usual, creativity takes off in the networks which have achieved thegreatest degree of prominence in the previous generation. It was a combinationof European teachers—some visited at their home bases by sojourning Japanese,others who taught in Japan—and local Japanese intellectual leaders thatflowed together to produce the creativity of the Kyoto school. Nishida Kitarowas the great star of this school, but it will be convenient first to examine thenetwork around him.Inoue Tetsujiro was the first Japanese to hold a philosophy chair at Tokyo.372 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsAs a mark of independence, he launched the counterattack against Europeanthinking. His 1891 “Conflict between Religion and Education” rejected Christianityfor placing Christ above emperor, and for its injunction of universallove as incompatible with national loyalty and filial piety. He also attacked thematerialist evolutionism popularized by Kato Hiroyuki. Inoue represents theupsurge of Shinto conservatism and nationalism against the generation of theEuropean importers; but as we have seen, Japanese conservatism was by nomeans an anti-intellectual movement, but a long-standing trajectory of innovationwithin indigenous Japanese networks.50 Among Inoue’s pupils at Tokyowere Hatano Seiichi and Nishida Kitaro.Hatano, who became one of the secondary leaders of the Kyoto school,combined several network lineages: at Tokyo he studied under Inoue and alsoFIGURE 7.5. MEIJI WESTERNIZERS AND THE KYOTO SCHOOL,1835–1935Innovation through Conservatism: Japan • 373with a pupil of Eduard von Hartmann; sojourning at Berlin and Heidelberg,he studied with Harnack, Windelband, and Troeltsch. So far we have aneclectic mixture of Western vitalism, historicist theology, and Neo-Kantianism.Like Nishida, Hatano began as a historian of Western philosophy, suspendedamong its various positions before going on to develop his independent stance.More important, it was not just the content of European philosophy that wascoming through but the creative energy of the European networks. The Kyotoschool was not merely linked with figures such as Windelband, but transformedthose links in just the way that contemporary networks in European philosophywere transforming.The Stimulus of Exporting Ideas to the West: The Kyoto SchoolThe distinctiveness of Japanese philosophy in the newly autonomous universitystructure also involves a key indigenous element. After generations of Confuciandominance, Buddhism suddenly made a comeback. This can have hadnothing to do with events in the surrounding society; the Kyoto school followedclose on the time when Buddhism was being attacked, sometimes violently,and the school system (which at its elementary levels had been heavilystaffed with Buddhist priests) was being secularized. The key is rather in theintellectual network. We see here an instance of a phenomenon which we findin the history of Islamic and Byzantine philosophy as well: the exporting ofideas to a receptive foreign audience stimulates further production of just thoseideas. In this case, the receptive foreign audience consisted of the Europeanscholars exploring the history of Asian religions. In the network surroundingNishida and the Kyoto school were links to just those European scholars whowere most interested in what the Japanese had to offer in the realm ofBuddhism. Nishida’s teacher Nanjo Bunyu was a monk who had been sent bythe Pure Land sect to Oxford to study Sanskrit with Max Müller; returning in1885, Nanjo began teaching Indian philosophy at Tokyo. In turn, Nanjo’s pupilD. T. Suzuki came to Chicago for the World’s Parliament of religions in 1893,organized by Paul Carus. Suzuki stayed as Carus’ assistant during 1897–1908,meeting William James (just then in his phase of exploring religious experience),and translating Sanskrit and Japanese Buddhist texts. Suzuki eventuallybecame famous by promoting Zen in the West through his books of 1927–1938(Kitagawa, 1987: 320–323).The revitalization of philosophical Buddhism and more specifically of Zentook place as these networks crystallized in the autonomous Japanese university.This is hardly what one would have expected from the flow of ideas orthe continuation of past intellectual trajectories. Zen had not had an importantthinker since Hakuin in the early 1700s. Confucianism after eight generations374 • Intellectual Communities: Asian Pathsof dominance had been disowned by the reform of the school system, but itwas not Buddhism but Shinto that was on the rise in the Meiji public sphere.The Kyoto school threw out the materialist positivism of the early wave ofreformers; drawing selectively on Christian, Idealist, and Neo-Kantian imports,it transformed them creatively into a new position. Nishida Kitaro was the starwho emerged from the intersection of these networks. As a pupil of NanjoBunyu, he was a grandpupil of Max Müller; he was trained under InoueTetsujiro, whose search for a national intellectual identity Nishida contined;and he was a friend of Hatano, and a close friend of D. T. Suzuki since theirsecondary school days.51As in all creativity, Nishida transformed the ingredients transmitted throughthese networks, sometimes by direct opposition. In 1911 he created an “orientallogic” as an explicit basis for oriental culture, to parallel the Westerncultural foundation provided by Greek logic. Nishida’s “logic of field” or “logicof place” combined German Neo-Kantian logic with the Mahayana nothingnessof Nagarjuna. Nishida found his creative slot by working out the similaritiesand contrasts of Zen metaphysics with the logics of Aristotle, Leibniz,Kant, and Hegel; Nishida’s later works distinguish his “place of nothingness”from the noumena of Leibniz and Kant. Against the popularity of neo-Kantianismat Kyoto and Tokyo universities, Nishida rejected the distinctions ofvalue and being, meaning and fact; unity is derived from the self-consciousnessexemplified in Zen meditation, as the internal union of meaning and reflection,the self-generation of concrete experience.52 Nishida was the first in the worldto produce a high-level confrontation of sophisticated ideas from Asian andGreek-European traditions. By contrast, his European counterparts—Deussen,Müller, Carus—acted only as translators and importers, not creative synthesizersof these lineages.Nishida’s pupils and followers found their creative space by followingsimilar network combinations. A number of them sought out the leadingGerman philosophers—both the Neo-Kantians and their network successors,the phenomenologists. Tanabe Hajime studied at Berlin, and at Freiburg withHusserl; his work proceeded from a philosophy of mathematics along the linesof Neo-Kantianism to a synthesis of Hegel, Husserl, and Heidegger into areligious philosophy combining Buddhism with the Christian doctrine of love.Tanabe bridged Nishida’s “oriental logic” to both nationalist particularismand universalism, propounding a “logic of species” (i.e., the nation) mediatingbetween individual and mankind. Watsuji Tetsuro, a friend of Tanabe,brought into play the primary contribution within Japanese intellectual history,in 1926 reviving philosophical interest in Dogen after centuries of neglect. Likeothers of the Kyoto school, Watsuji focused on the relations among Nietzsche,Kierkegaard, and Buddhism. In retrospect we may be inclined to take this asInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 375old hat, a Japanese importation of existentialism. In fact the European existentialistvogue did not really get going until the 1930s and especially the1940s; the Kyoto school philosophers were much closer to the source of thismovement, and not solely because of their network contacts with the phenomenologistsin the early 1920s.The most renowned Japanese philosopher of the following generation,Nishitani Keiji, was a Nishida pupil who spent three years studying withHeidegger in the 1930s. Nishitani perpetuated Nishida’s central technique:juxtaposing Europe and Asia, and relying heavily on Dogen, he set forthBuddhist thought patterns as a solution to present-day cultural crisis. Nishitanicriticized Western theism for its cleavage between God and creation, subjectand object, out of which grows the twin evils of rootless science and technologyand the egocentric nihilism of the existentialists. Against this Nishitani upheldBuddhist sunyata (emptiness) and conditioned co-production. Nishida andNishitani had an ecumenical as well as a nationalist side. Nishitani drew linksto the Western mystics (Plotinus, Eriugena, Eckhart, Boehme, Cusanus), butargued that there is a better grounding in “oriental logic.”Here we should be aware of a preemptive move by the Kyoto schoolvis-à-vis all other Japanese (and indeed Chinese and Indian) philosophicalschools: it was Buddhist metaphysics, and specifically that of the Hua-yen–Zentradition (rooted in the classical formulation of Nagarjuna), that was elevatedto the title of “the Eastern Way of Thought.” Schools like Sorai’s worldlypragmatism were swept from the attention space.53 Zen philosophers alliedwith nationalist self-assertion to take control of the newly imported universitybase. European philosophers were enlisted either as allies or foils, serving toshift the focus of attention to a Zen-centered agenda.The Kyoto school coincided with the nationalist repudiation of Westernideas and institutions in Japanese political movements more broadly in the1920s and 1930s. Nationalist and indeed fascist political ideologues and activists,such as Tachibana Kosaburo, formulated positions which paralleledNishida’s (CHJ, 1988: 711–761). In 1932 Tachibana too rejected the formalisticlogic of the West as inapplicable to Asia; materialist domination of natureis alien to the spirit manifested in Buddhism, Confucianism, and Hinduism,emphasizing the non-self over the self. For Okawa Shumei in 1939, the independenceof Asia from the West was historically awakened by the victory ofJapan in the Russo-Japanese War of 1905. These ideas paralleled Nishida’s andextended them into political activism, manifested in, among other things,bombings and assassinations of parliamentary leaders. On their side, theyounger members of the Kyoto school (Nishitani, Koyama Iwao, KosakaMasaaki, Suzuki Shigetaka) interpreted Nishida’s ontological “space” as the“world stage” where Japan would takes its place in action. Kosaka and376 • Intellectual Communities: Asian PathsKoyama went so far as to extol war as the test of moral hegemony in the worldand advocated state enforcement of discipline in intellectual as well as socialmatters. Outside the militant ranks of the Kyoto school per se (while teachingin the same university), Watsuji expounded Nietzschean denunciation of rationalismand sought a parallel to Nietzsche’s return to primordial Greekattitudes in a return to the spirit of ancient Japan. In 1942, just as the Pacificwar was at its height, Nishitani took part in a major intellectual gathering atKyoto on the theme of “overcoming modernity.”Despite the nationalist and particularist emphases of these movements, theycannot be considered merely a continuation of the previous tradition of NationalLearning or of Meiji-era Shinto. Those had arisen in a critical dialecticwith Confucianism and were principally anti-Chinese (and secondarily anti-Buddhist). Both the Kyoto school and nationalist ideologues such as Tachibanaand Okawa, however, tended to draw heavily on Buddhism as the commondenominator of Asian culture as a whole; for Watsuji, Buddhist nothingness isthe counterweight to Western alienation between self and nature. One may seethis as an ideological stretch to legitimate Japanese imperial conquests on theAsian mainland. But although there was convergence between the philosophicaltrajectory of the Kyoto school and the ideologies of Japanese fascism, theinner community of intellectuals here did not simply resonate external politicalmoods. In general, the intellectual world never reduces to external politics pureand simple; although the two spheres sometimes mesh, they have their owndynamics. Buddhism, revived by the inner dynamics of the Japanese universityphilosophers as they made their entry into the cosmopolitan networks of worldphilosophy, provided the key ontological concepts for the repudiation of Westernrationalism. Although this provided materials for fascist propaganda aswell, it would be absurd to consider Buddhism per se fascist or militaristic.The Kyoto school, for all its nationalist affinities, depended on cosmopolitannetworks and themes. Its repudiation of the West is itself a theme withincontemporary Western philosophy. The struggle over rationality and sciencewas a central issue in their network contacts—the Neo-Kantians, phenomenologists,and Heidegger. Any vigorous intellectual community derives itsenergy from oppositions. These same ingredients were combined by variousmembers of the Japanese network to produce contending positions. Thus,among Nishida’s pupils were the Marxist Tosaku Jun, and most famously MikiKiyoshi, who studied also with Rickert and Heidegger. Miki too took upNishida’s ontology of “place,” which he analyzed in terms of the expansionof world capitalism into Asia; the counter-stroke of the Japanese invasion ofChina in 1937 he interpreted as the movement toward Asian unificationaround a new era of cooperativism. Here the theme of Marxist socialism wasblended with Shinran’s Pure Land Buddhism. Miki envisioned an “AsianInnovation through Conservatism: Japan • 377humanism” based on Buddhist compassion for all sentient beings. Despite hisnaive or opportunistic dallying with militaristic sentiments, the blend was nota politically acceptable one, and Miki died in prison. Others of the Kyotoschool, especially the luminaries Watsuji and Nishitani, emerged onto theworld philosophical scene after the war with reputations abstracted frompolitics, welcomed by the modern tradition of self-questioning which hadbecome such a focus of attention in the West during these same generations.Again we see in Japan broad parallels with Western intellectual development.The era of secularism which set in with the displacement of religion(Buddhism in one place, Christianity in the other) from monopoly over themeans of intellectual production; the rise of the marketplace for education andfor popular culture; the expansion of literacy and higher training that wentalong with capitalism and the bureaucratization of society: all these wereindigenous developments in Japan, under way since the pre-Tokugawa era. Bythe 1700s, Japan had more than just its “Enlightenment” rationalists and itsneoconservative traditionalists. Japanese political and intellectual movementsof the 1800s were those of a society with cosmopolitan networks holdingrefined means of mobilization, facing a state whose problems were those of arelatively autonomous capitalist economy and a modern situation of religiousand cultural action. It should not be surprising that in the early 1900s Japaneseintellectuals were fully in the swing of the complex, even tortured combinationsof intellectual lineages that are characteristic of its counterparts in the West.For this reason it has not been only Eurocentric Westerners who harp on“the opening of Japan.” Since the early 1900s, Japanese intellectuals andideologists themselves have generally adopted the view of their society as atraditional one, suddenly beset by the pressures of the modern world imposedfrom without. It has been a convenient excuse. Since the Kyoto school of philosophers,it has been customary to attribute to the West the dislocating effectsof the rationalized worldview, the deadly inhumanity of market relations, andthe pressures of production. By adopting the myth that Japanese modernizationwas Westernization, Japanese intellectuals and politicians evaded the problemsinherent in a dynamic that was substantially the same in every part of theworld.