CHAPTER 8£Tensions of Indigenous and Imported Ideas:Islam, Judaism, ChristendomPhilosophy in the medieval societies of the West built on earlier cultural capital.In the long historical view, we are tempted to skip over that which is derivativeand to concentrate on that which is originating. Our deprecating image is anunsophisticated society overwhelmed by imports from a previous civilizationand unable to get its own creativity off the ground. The image is doublymisleading.Importing ideas has its own intellectual rhythm: passive at first, it is capableof turning into the normal creative process within a few generations. We seethis in the Buddhist philosophies of medieval China, where the receivingenvironment already had a well-established tradition of literate culture—noperipheral region here overwhelmed by sophisticated imports. In the regionsof Islam and European Christendom, the imports came into tribal societiesnewly organized into state and church. What made their philosophies distinctivein quality was not so much their initial dependence on imports—which inthe case of Christendom was repetitively dependent, repetitively importingideas from other civilizations, including Islam—as that the receiving contextwas dominated by a politically powerful religion. Idea imports are tagged fortheir relevance or opposition to religious orthodoxy.Such a situation is ready-made for a Whiggish interpretation of intellectualhistory, in which defenders of tradition battle against openness to new ideas.But openness to new ideas initially takes the form of adulation of old ideas,hardly creative in its own right. Our received tradition of a Greeks-to-Arabsto-Christians sequence imposes a second kind of blindness. We miss the opportunityto peer into the cauldron where indigenous intellectuals develop theirown disputes. Starting from religious-political disputes, the Muslims drove upthe level of abstraction and revealed the ontological and epistemological issueswhich are distinctive to monotheism. Imports are rarely passive; indigenouslydeveloped factions have their own motivations for seeking out imports andreacting to what comes in. Our aim must be to look at the creative and un-387creative aspects of idea imports, in the usual context of multi-sided intellectualconflict which drives creativity everywhere. The viewpoint will give us anunexpected bonus: we will see that not only importing but also exporting ideasto an eager recipient can stimulate its own form of creativity.Philosophy within a Religious ContextWhat difference does it make when intellectual communities arise as offshootsof religious organization? One might suppose that this circumstance affectsonly arbitrary aspects of the context of thought. Once an intellectual networkbecomes organized, it generates its own problems and standards. Intellectualscompetitively appropriate whatever cultural capital exists, and will producecontrasting positions by the dynamics of creation through opposition. TheQurÁan, the Bible, the Vedic hymns, the sayings of the Buddha are so manystarting points which become increasingly overlaid by the accumulated debatesof generations of intellectuals. Abstract issues of metaphysics and logicemerge and become autonomous questions in their own right: religion spawnsphilosophy.Religious doctrines are put forward as charismatic revelation or as inalterabletradition; they are to be learned, recited, and put into practice as guidesfor ritual or for living. They are not, on the face of it, subjects for discussionand intellectual development. There is a limited exception in the period whena religion first assembles its written canon, for example, the period ca. 150–200c.e. (Aland and Aland, 1987) when the Christian Gospels, letters of Saint Paul,and a few other texts of the founding generations were accepted as holyscripture while other candidate texts were excluded, along with rival organizations(such as the Gnostic circles) which carried them. Similarly in Islam, thegenerations after the death of Muhammad were devoted to the redaction ofMuhammad’s revelations (the QurÁan, ca. 632–656) and to compiling (whichwent on into the mid-800s) hadith, the recollections of the Prophet’s companionsused as alternate sources of legal tradition (Watt, 1985: 57; Lapidus, 1988:103–104). Beyond this point the canon is closed, and the activities of thescholars should now be reduced to a simple transmission of the received word.The extent to which this closure happens is a sociological phenomenon inits own right. Quasi-canonical literature may continue to grow, if the religionlacks an authority which monopolizes the definition of the holy texts. Buddhistsutras claiming the status of charismatic revelations and bolstered by allegationsof antiquity continued to appear for many centuries, from 400 b.c.e.down to 300 c.e. and later (Conze, 1962: 200). The Hindu world was extremelydecentralized after the breakdown of the old Vedic priest guilds;scriptural status could be claimed not only for later commentaries and super-388 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscommentaries on the Vedic hymns, but also for new mythological collections(the Puranas down through 1500 a.d.) and poetic epics (the Mahabharata ca.300 b.c.e.–300 c.e., and the Ramayana ca. 200 b.c.e.–200 c.e.; O’Flaherty,1975: 17–18). Judaism, after the destruction of the Jerusalem temple in 70 c.e.and the dispersion of Jewish communities, developed an accretion of religiouslaw and interpretation, the Mishnah, which was collected and codified inseveral editions between 200 and 500 c.e. (Segal, 1986: 16, 133–136). TheTalmudic literature of the famous teachers continued to grow; the systematizingefforts of Maimonides and his successors around 1200 attempted again toreduce this material to a simpler conception of orthodoxy, but there was noagency to enforce it.Christianity and Islam stand out because the organizational conditions werepresent relatively early to close their holy canons.1 It was here that the relationsbetween religion and philosophy became explicitly an issue. In these circumstancesa crucial topic of philosophy must be the relationship between “faith”and “reason.” This in turn gave impetus to questions of epistemology. Whenreligion is armed with coercive political power, the range of answers is limited;the prudent thinker is forced to claim either that reason and faith harmonize,or if they do not, that faith is superior. Bold advocates of the independence ofphilosophy, if protected by enough organizational insulation, or if they findchinks in the system of political enforcement, might push the border.The philosophical path which starts here may continue farther. A crucialpush is given when such epistemological issues are taken up by theologicalconservatives. Once elaborate metaphysical constructions are produced acrossseveral generations of philosophers, the intellectuals who are closest to thespace of conservative dogmatism can turn philosophical sophistication againstitself by raising the epistemological level, and can question the validity ofarguments within the realm of reason itself. We find this in Islam with al-Ghazali and Ibn Taymiyah, and in Christendom with the conservative condemnationsof 1277 leading to the refined positions of Scotus and Ockham. If thephilosophical community continues under religious challenge, further positionsare generated, and the field is propelled into a full-fledged epistemology. Thisis much more apparent in Christendom than in Islam, where the fundamentalistattacks increasingly constricted the philosophers, and the sophisticated conservativesthemselves lacked technically oriented followers; the significance of theissue disappeared with their opponents. The result was reinforced because ofthe tendency of later Islamic intellectuals to take refuge in a secret doctrineaccessible to the initiates of reason, while scripture was taken as metaphoricexpression for the crude masses. This removed the creative tension of argumentwith the orthodox; the esotericism of later Islam turned to a poetic mysticism,and away from the analytical issues of epistemology.Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 389This devious path from enforced doctrinal orthodoxy to critical epistemologyis not found unless religion is state-enforced. This route toward epistemologicalissues did not exist in China, where the state usually supported allmanner of ritualistic exercises, in a kind of pluralistic tolerance. There was nosacred scripture to be officially enforced; the nearest thing to it was theConfucian texts, but these were held to be products of human reason, and thuson the side of philosophy. Taoist religion by the late 400s c.e. claimed its textsto be charismatically revealed, but political weakness prevented Taoists fromelevating them to uniquely enforced scriptural truth. It follows that if the Taoistchurch had acquired long-term political power, its relations with non-dogmaticintellectuals would also have given rise to epistemological issues. The sameshould have happened if Buddhism had continued as the state religion beyondits short episodes of imperial favor in the T’ang.2The initial effect of religion on philosophy is not to produce epistemologicalcontroversy; that tends to come later as philosophers build up their ownpositions. Initially the religion sets forth a content on which intellectuals maywork. The Western religions begin with a pre-reflective anthropomorphism.God is a person, possessing human attributes such as knowledge, power,goodness, and will, raised of course to a superlative degree. God creates thephysical world, and will bring it to an end, much as any human could manufacturean object and then destroy it. Islam includes other supernaturallyendowed persons: the Prophet and various angels, with their missions andannouncements. Christianity in some ways redoubles the anthropomorphicelements, focusing not only on God but also on Christ, who is both a man andSon of God; on the miraculous elements of his virgin birth (which therebyelevate the person of his miraculous mother) and his crucifixion and resurrection;the doctrine of human sin and redemption, the Day of Judgment, and theresurrection of human bodies to eternal life in heaven or hell. Human eventsare given cosmic significance; conversely, the cosmos is tied to a personal scale.Such doctrines give rise to problems if the church, as a social organizationcarrying out rituals and justifying them by faith in holy scripture, declares thatthe texts are to be taken in a literal, commonsensical way. Originally it is notlaypersons who question the literal meaning of these doctrines; it is, after all,the miraculous aspect of this picture that makes it so impressive for ordinarypeople. It is the specialists within the church entrusted with the care andteaching of the holy documents, who feel a need to reduce the anthropomorphicelements because of their sophisticated conception of religious impressiveness.If God is superlative in every respect, how can he have merely physicalqualities? The QurÁan speaks of God sitting on his throne; the early theologiansargued that this is only a metaphor for his grandeur. In response the conservativelegalist Malik thundered: “The sitting is given, its modality is unknown.390 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsBelief in it is an obligation and raising questions regarding it is a heresy”(Fakhry, 1983: xvii). But Malik, against his own intentions, was therebystaking out one of the corners of philosophical turf. The Muslim intellectualcommunity went on for generations after this, taking various sides on the issueswhich arose directly out of the anthropomorphic scripture: the responsibilityof humans as against the providence and power of God, and then to moremetaphysical issues surfacing in these discussions.Various philosophical issues are provoked by anthropomorphic religionwhich are not shared by more cosmologically oriented religions such as Confucianism,Taoism, or Indian mysticism. The philosophical confrontation withanthropomorphism focused attention on the nature of transcendence andinfinite perfection and their relations to limitation and contingency. The issueof free will arose distinctively in the West, not in India or China, and with itthe nature of causality and determinism. It is the character of the oppositionsgenerated by religious doctrine, as much as the slant of that doctrine itself,that is fateful for the trajectory of philosophical problems.It is distinctive of the Western religions, not the Eastern, that philosophersdevoted much effort to proofs of the existence of God. Such proofs from areligious viewpoint are superfluous; the philosophers were not free in any caseto consider whether God does not really exist. The justification was sometimesoffered that proofs were needed in order to convince unbelievers or convertmembers of other faiths, but this seems a patent rationalization: Christians,Muslims, and Jews could not convert one another by proving the existenceof God, since all three faiths admitted this, and the differentiating items offaith were not proved in this fashion;3 and atheist unbelievers were an imaginaryfoil under these authoritarian regimes. The philosophers’ construction ofproofs for items of faith was a matter of creating a turf for pure intellectualactivity within the institutional space of the religious schools. These proofsbecame grounds on which metaphysical and epistemological doctrines couldbe worked out. With a sufficiently complex network of philosophers, such asarose in Christendom by the late 1200s, it was no longer a foregone conclusionthat one would have to succeed in proving the existence of God or the immortalsoul. By the time of Ockham and his followers, it was acceptable to concludethat these items could not be conclusively proved by reason; this was taken asdemonstrating the superior power of faith, and also of demarcating the territoryof distinctively philosophical techniques.The religious communities did not set out to have philosophies. Virtuallyall of them began with the notion that intellectual life is superfluous, indeedan obstacle to religious devotion. But the very structure of having specialistsin sacred texts created an intellectual community with its own dynamics.Greater abstraction and self-reflectiveness about one’s own tools was one ofTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 391the weapons which the intellectual community forged in order to carry out itsstruggles over the turf of theology. By a further twist of organizational development,the more abstract topics could become a focus in themselves. Thiswas not without dangers from the political arm of the church. Philosophicalinsiders pursuing the logic of debate on questions such as free will or theattributes of God could find themselves entangled in heresy disputes withtheologians. Such accusations and condemnations ring right through medievalChristian and Muslim philosophy. From one angle they certainly represent thechilling hand of power upon intellectual autonomy. But condemnations inthemselves do not distinguish between periods of creativity or stagnation;creative philosophers were just as likely to accuse their own opponents ofheresy. The distinctive philosophies of the West are those which were wrungout through these channels of conflict; the danger was a cost of the creativity.The Muslim World: An Intellectual CommunityAnchored by a Politicized ReligionIslam begins as a theocracy. Here theological factions are always in the firstinstance political factions; to claim theological orthodoxy is the same as claimingpolitical rulership of the Islamic state. After Arabian military conquestsswept the Middle East in the generation after Muhammad (taking Syria, Egypt,Iraq, and Persia between 634 and 654), Islamic warriors fractionated alonglines of charismatic succession to the rulership. The line divided supporters ofthe winners and of the losers in the civil wars of the succession: roughly, theposition eventually known as Sunnites, who accepted the political status quoand the victorious lineage, and the ShiÀites, intransigents who held out loyallyfor the family line of the losing faction. On each side in turn there was furtherfractionation. The victorious majority developed a pragmatic group who offeredcompromise with the losers, in effect declaring its willingness not topursue the old issues of legitimacy and illegitimacy of various claims. On theShiÀite side, the more vehement rebels were eventually displaced by a factionwhich held that the Imam, the true successor to the Prophet was in hiding.This gave a somewhat otherworldly tone to the expectation that in somefuture generation the correct theocratic lineage would reappear, and it allowedImamites to operate as a spiritual sect within the Islamic state without necessarilyrebelling against it politically. Other ShiÀite factions remained moremilitant, sometimes winning political power in particular states.Islamic factions became a reflex of geopolitics and revolutionary success.The initial wave of conquests, uniting the tribes of Arabia, swept into thepower vacuum created by the stalemate between the Byzantine and SassanianPersian empires. The ÀAbbasid caliphate consolidated power after three civil392 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsHEIGHT OF THE ‘ABBASID CALIPHATE, 800 C.E.wars, and from 750 administered an empire centralized at Baghdad.4 After 830the caliphate began to lose de facto power to regional administrators, andfull-fledged independent states divided the region between 950 and 1200. Thesein turn became subject to waves of imperial conquest; the most successful werethe Seljuk Turks around 1040–1100; the Mongol conquerors 1220–1260, whosoon converted to Islam and split into smaller states; and the Ottomans, whoexpanded from Asia Minor from the 1360s. Some of the ShiÀite factionsacquired state power, notably the IsmaÀili activists in Egypt, 970–1170. Winnersand losers, orthodox and anti-orthodox traded places on a geopoliticalcheckerboard.The principal consequence for intellectual life was that Islamic religionnever acquired a centralized church organization. According to theocratictradition accepted by all factions, the caliph was successor to the Prophet andleader of the faithful; but his legitimacy was questioned by important factionsever since the early generations of Islam, and was further broken up with thedispersion of political power. De facto religious authority devolved into thehands of the Àulama, or religious scholars. As befits a theocracy, the law wasthe religious law, and the religious schools in effect monopolized the activitiesof law courts as well. Orthodox religious scholars were quasi-independent ofthe state, without forming an organized church comparable to the Christianpapacy. Only the ÀAbbasid caliphate at its height had enough power to attemptuniform control of religious life; the powerful caliph al-MaÁmun (r. 813–833)and his successors attempted to impose doctrinal orthodoxy on all Muslimscholars. But this inquisition on behalf of caliphal power was resisted, andfinally abandoned in 848 as the caliphate began to disintegrate; thereafter theÀulama dominated religious law and doctrine without challenge.Insofar as the schools of the Àulama were centers of intellectual life, theywere anchored in the particularistic concerns of daily ritual, holy texts, andpractical law. Although more abstract consideration of theology did emergefrom this base, it was continually open to attack. More detached intellectuallife was supported by patronage of the political rivals of the Àulama, especiallythe courtly circles around a political ruler. Precisely because the ruler atBaghdad or Córdoba was a theocrat manqué whose religious claims werealways overshadowed by the truly devout of the religious schools, court circlescould tend toward the opposite pole of speculation or occasionally downrightsecularism. This kept intellectual life in a precarious situation, at the mercy ofgeopolitical events that might overthrow a particular regime. The high pointof the non-religious philosophers was under the patronage of the ÀAbbasids atBaghdad, and faded with the loss of protection after 950. One mitigatingfactor was the existence of secret societies. Although these were predominantlypolitical and religious in their concerns, the secret societies were always394 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsin opposition to at least some part of the status quo around the Islamic world;and they sometimes looked for allies among unorthodox factions on the intellectualfront. Thus one could find unholy alliances between IsmaÀili or Imamiteconspirators and hard-pressed rationalist theologians and philosophers.Four FactionsFractionation of the intellectual field moved slowly at first, then picked upspeed in the generations after 800. Four main groups of intellectuals graduallyformed, three of them religious, one secular. First came the practitioners ofrational theology, kalam, of which the most important group was the MuÀtazilites;in opposition emerged the scriptural literalists. In addition there werethe Sufi mystics, and on the secular side, the translators and practitioners ofGreek and other foreign science and philosophy, falsafa.5Indigenous Theological PhilosophersThe prevailing attitude of intellectual historians is that only the Greek falasifa(philosophers) are worth paying attention to, since it was they who transmittedthe main line of European philosophy. These blinders prevent us from seeingwhat is more significant: the dynamics by which Islamic theologians broke intophilosophical terrain of their own accord. Indigenous theological disputes, likeany other sustained intellectual conflict, spontaneously drive up the level ofabstraction and uncover issues of metaphysics and epistemology. We have alaboratory for how philosophy emerges nearer to us than the obscure beginningsof the Chinese, Indians, and Greeks, as well as a picture of the independentpath by which were created positions paralleling those of later Europeandevelopments at the time of Descartes, Locke, and Malebranche.The first notable intellectuals appeared in the early 700s (see Figure 8.1).At first there was an undifferentiated style of scriptural scholar, such as Hasanal-Basri, who was famous for his pronouncements in law as well as theology,and was claimed as a predecessor to the Sufis for his asceticism. In the nexttwo generations the field began to crystallize into factions. The early center oftheological discussion was at Basra, founded by the Arab conquerors in theMesopotamian river delta. When Baghdad was founded in the 760s as thecapital for the new ÀAbbasid caliphate, these two cities about 250 miles apartbecame the twin centers of intellectual life, displaying the familiar pattern ofintersecting networks circulating at rival centers.The earliest issues emerged out of religious politics. On one front there wasa dispute between predestination and free will, on the other flank the questionof the unity of God as against dualism or anthropomorphism. PredestinationTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 395FIGURE 8.1. ISLAMIC AND JEWISH PHILOSOPHERS ANDSCIENTISTS, 700–935: BASRA AND BAGHDAD SCHOOLS(all at Baghdad unless marked)396 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathshad become an issue because of an early political dispute over the legitimacyof the caliphate. The succession had been won by violence and treachery, andsome Islamic factions held that sins such as these make one cease to be aMuslim and render a ruler subject to overthrow. Those willing to accept thestatus quo tended to accept as well the argument that the caliph’s acts werepredestined. Free will was accordingly condemned as an incitement to rebellion.As late as 743 some advocates of free will were executed by the caliph.This political connection was ephemeral. Within a few generations the politicalimplications had been reversed; for a period in the 800s the MuÀtazilite advocacyof free will was put forward as orthodoxy by the caliphate.A faction was formed at the mosque at Basra out of those who took anintermediate position on the debate over sinners—the issue implying how muchloyalty one must give to a sinful caliph. A further split reacted against thetheological moderation of Hasan al-Basri; this faction stressed the predestinationof human acts and the omnipotence of God so strongly as to hold thatactions can be imputed to humans only figuratively. Intellectual debate wasnow driving positions to extremes. The next step was the MuÀtazilite defenseof free will, the typical pattern of intellectual development through escalatingconflict between opposite sides of the field. The defenders of free will wereforced to elaborate their position, declaring that God does no evil. This led toa recognition that the standards of good and evil are not conventional orarbitrary. To reconcile this stance with the power of God, these theologiansconcluded that God has a rational nature, and that moral laws are part of thisunchangeable essence of reason.This was one route which led from literal scriptural piety into a philosophicalmetaphysics. Joining it was another stream of argument over the unity andattributes of God. The MuÀtazilite faction forming at Basra and Baghdadentered into a multi-fronted war against rival theologies, attacking the Zoroastrianand Manichaean dualists (the former the traditional religion of Persia,now under Islamic conquest; the latter a Christian heresy centered in Mesopotamia)as well as the Trinity of the Christians (widespread in the Islamicdomains of Iraq, Syria, and Egypt). This controversy led to proofs that thereis only one God, undivided and without plurality. The MuÀtazilites becamefamous for their proofs, not only of the unity of God but also of the creatednessof the world, and thus of the existence of the Creator as well. Theology becamerationally defended and set on the path to where reason itself could be exaltedabove scripture and revelation. The MuÀtazilite proofs were adopted wholesaleby contemporary Jewish thinkers who became the first notable Jewish philosophersof the Middle Ages.Both Muslim and Jewish practitioners of kalam, or rational theology,argued for the harmonization of rational proofs with their scriptural doctrines.Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 397The MuÀtazilites met opposition from the faction of Islamic scriptural literalistscrystallizing at the same time, and were goaded into a more uncompromisingstand (Hodgson, 1974: 1:386–389). The hadith scholars were fighting for theirown brand of scripturalism, attempting to formulate alongside the QurÁan acanon of the recollections of Muhammad’s companions; their stance exaltedthe status of scriptures over everything else. They attacked the application ofpersonal judgment in legal cases; the doctrine of free will, as limiting thepowers of God; and the unity of God because it contradicts the personal andeven physical attributes of God, which are mentioned in scripture. The rationaltheologians, who had been arguing for the metaphorical nature of these passages,were driven onto more extreme grounds. Adopting Aristotelean language,they held that God is a substance of absolute unity and simplicity, andthat there are no attributes apart from his essence.Defenders of kalam now took the offensive against the hadith scholars.Marshaling their arguments for the unity of God, they held that the QurÁan isa created object, not an eternal truth; to elevate scripture to a holy object,co-eternal with God, is to fall into dualism, even idolatry. This stance undercutthe status claims of the hadith scholars as keepers of the primary cult objectof Islam. Charges and counter-charges of either anthropomorphism or blasphemyeventually led to a political showdown between the two camps.A clearly identified MuÀtazilite school emerged out of the disputes amongkalamite factions in the two generations from Dirar and his contemporaryMuÀammar ibn ÀAbbad in the late 700s, to Abu-Àl-Hudhayl, Bishr ibn al-MuÀtamir, and al-Nazzam shortly after 800. They are connected in a networkof masters, pupils, and rivals, and split into the schools of Basra and Baghdad.Abu-Àl-Hudhayl became the great systematizer, laying out the main points ofMuÀtazilite orthodoxy, stressing the unity and justice of God, and as its corollaryfree will. To this other MuÀtazilites added the createdness of the QurÁan,and the doctrine that everything exists only as attributes of atoms in time, andmust be continually re-created.Why did the Arab theologians develop time-atomism? The influence ofGreek philosophical texts at this moment is hardly a sufficient explanation.6Why should the Arab thinkers have adopted a doctrine which was opposed byall the Greek authorities then being introduced? Moreover, time-atomism wasby no means an ontological support for their major theological doctrine, thedefense of free will, since perishing atoms require God’s continuous intervention.Neither of these external influences, Greek imports or theological politics,explains the line of intellectual development. What seems to have happened isthis. The attempt to support free will led to refinements in the theory ofcausality, ways in which God could be kept clear of direct responsibility forwhat happens in the world. The other theological question, the unity of God398 • Intellectual Communities: Western Paths(and the related issue of the createdness of the QurÁan), led to considerationof substance and attributes. The combination of these two issues generated anew intellectual space. Muslim philosophers began to compete for attentionby innovating over their own problems. By taking apart the notions first ofattributes, then of substance, they arrived at the doctrine of atomism. At thispoint a true intellectual competition existed. Islamic philosophy swung freefrom being a mere reflex of political positions and onto an autonomous path.Fueled at first by theological energies, the philosophical arguments becamemore subtle. The Aristotelean concepts of substance and accident were subjectedto scrutiny in the generation just before 800. At Basra, Dirar ibn ÀAmrrejected the notion of substance; he held that a body is a collection of accidents,arranged in a hierarchy; once constituted, an accident may become the substratumof other accidents (Fakhry, 1983: 53; Watt, 1973: 194–195). PerhapsDirar’s contemporary Hisham ibn al-Hakam (22 in the key to Figure 8.1) haddriven him to this position; Hisham held that there is no distinction of substanceand accident, since every substance is divisible ad infinitum. Hishamwas an avowed anthropomorphist, defending the literal descriptions of Godin the QurÁan; since attributes (or accidents) were at issue, he was willing toreduce everything to an attribute. Some of the MuÀtazilites (e.g., 30 in Figure8.1) adopted the same position. Substance was dissolving; out of this came thedistinctive MuÀtazilite metaphysics, time-atomism.Dirar was also struggling for a way to defend free will; he held that Godcontrols what happens in the outer world, but man, not God, acquires themoral responsibility by inward assent or dissent (Fakhry, 1983: 48–49). Dirar’ssolution was apparently controversial among his contemporaries, for he wasattacked as a determinist. He held that there is no bodily substance but onlyaccidents, and these cannot exist for two successive moments; this implied thatthey are continuously re-created by God. This is the first mention of time-atoms,as yet applied only to attributes rather than substances.A rival stance was taken by another Basra theologian, MuÀammar. Far fromeliminating substance, MuÀammar held that God brought about the originalexistence of bodies by creating the atoms they are composed of (Wolfson, 1976:158, 560–576; Peters, 1968: 144). Accidents are caused in turn by the aggregationof bodily atoms. God thus causes accidents only indirectly, and is notresponsible for their good or evil qualities. For MuÀammar, man is an immaterial,knowledgeable substance connected to the body. Free will exists onlyinwardly; the body is part of the external world, subject to the necessity ofnature. It is a dualism not unlike Descartes’s.So far, Dirar has no atomic substance but only attributes which are temporalatoms. MuÀammar has atomic substances, although they are not timeatoms,but are permanent once created by God. The next generation appearsTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 399to have developed a thoroughgoing atomism. Abu-Àl-Hudhayl, who successfullysystematized the MuÀtazilite theological position, produced an influentialcompromise among the ontological positions. He declared that some, but notall, accidents exist for only a moment in time; if they are to appear again fora second moment, they must be created afresh by God (Watt, 1985: 53;Wolfson, 1976: 531–532). This applies above all to the accidents of will andmotion, that is, those qualities which are involved in action in the world, andhence are implicated in the question of moral responsibility. By contrast,AbuÀl-Hudhayl, along with many other MuÀtazilites, reserved certain featuresof the physical and spiritual world for the category of durable accidents,including color, life, and knowledge (Fakhry, 1983: 54); presumably this wasin order to preserve a responsible human entity across moments of time. Godcauses both the duration and the destruction of accidents; this in turn raisedthe question whether duration and destruction are themselves accidents whichexist in a spatial substratum. Secondary metaphysical problems were emerging,and the ontological status of existence and change became a topic of debate.In this same generation a rival MuÀtazilite school formed at Baghdad, ledby MuÀammar’s pupil Bishr al-MuÀtamir. Bishr gave a more realist ontologicalslant to time-atomism. Even though God continuously intervenes in creatingand destroying attributes, every creation of existence involves a real duration,and every destruction is a real action too (Wolfson, 1976: 522–543). Godcreates these time-atoms out of nothing. But (according to later commentators)this MuÀtazilite school held that “nothing” is also a substantive “something”;this implies that God creates things out of a pre-existent matter.The atomist position was not yet settled. The most radical of the MuÀtazilites,al-Nazzam, kept up Dirar’s attack on substance. Al-Nazzam argued thatsubstance does not exist, since it can be infinitely divided. The more moderateMuÀtazilites had taken this argument only to a point; they were willing toreduce attributes to instants in time, without duration, and to reduce substanceto atoms (though disputing whether they were with or without size). Al-Nazzampushed onward, into an extreme time-phenomenalism: there exists nothingbut accidents, and none of these are durable. All other accidents reduce to theaccident of motion, which is inherently transitory (Fakhry, 1983: 49–51,215–6; Wolfson, 1976: 514–517). Al-Nazzam’s Heraclitus-like position led todifficulties of the sort raised by the Eleatics. Since a distance consists of aninfinite number of points, how is it possible to traverse all of them and arriveanywhere? Al-Nazzam attempted to overcome this Zeno-like paradox by proposinga process of “leaps” from one atomic point to another over the interveningpoints. His doctrine of perpetual motion also had difficulties in explainingthe apparent rest of bodies in one place; al-Nazzam countered this byarguing that rest consists in bodies moving into the same place twice insuccession.400 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsAl-Nazzam was among the most creative of these philosophers, and alsothe most extreme; on the issue of the createdness of the QurÁan, he held thatit cannot even resemble the transcendent word of God (Wolfson, 1976: 274–275). He died just before the great crisis affecting the MuÀtazilites, which threwthem from political favor into unorthodoxy. Al-Nazzam was attacked byorthodox MuÀtazilites and scripturalists alike. His doctrines do not appear tohave had any immediate followers, and the MuÀtazilites gathered together indefense of their more moderate atomism. Some versions of time-atomism alsoheld that the atoms are bearers of accidents which exist Platonically, apartfrom the realm of time (Fakhry, 1983: 216). Later doctrines were to disputewhether any accidents are exempt from existing as time-atoms continually recreatedby God. It is not clear whether AbuÀl-Hudhayl held that substances aswell as accidents are atomic time-instants; but by the early 900s, the BaghdadMuÀtazilite al-KaÀbi (109 in Figure 8.1) was holding that every substance andaccident must be created afresh every moment by God (Watt, 1973: 301–302).This emphasis on God’s direct causality put increasing strain on the doctrineof free will. At this moment, the AshÀarite camp broke away and produced amore politically respectable version of MuÀtazilite time-atomism.Scriptural Anti-rationalistsIslamic thought was by no means primordially scriptural and conservative.Literal defenders of holy scripture emerged gradually, in increasing polaritywith the rational theologians. There were hundreds of schools of scripturalspecialists across the Islamic Empire, dispensing religious law for local concerns(Makdisi, 1981: 9). Their practical orientation kept their work relativelyconcrete and unintellectual; abstract theological issues were not their maininterest, except insofar as these were points of political significance. Therational theologians who emerged at the mosque at Basra and then at Baghdadwere initially part of this same undifferentiated occupation of learned Àulama.Some of them became caught up in a network of argument which pushed thepolitically significant issues onto abstract grounds, and thence into philosophicalconstructions which took on attention in their own right; others, includingmany followers of Hasan al-Basri himself, joined the hadith specialists. Theemerging argument among these factions gradually brought several of theschools of QurÁanic legal scholarship to prominence above the others becauseof their stands on larger questions of Islamic orthodoxy. The dispersed localschools began to shape into something like political parties among the Sunniloyalists of the regime, and the number of positions winnowed down aroundthe most successful legal schools.Their initial position was not necessarily hard-line scripturalist. The firstprominent school, organized at Baghdad in the middle generation of the 700s,Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 401was the Hanifites, followers of Abu Hanifa, who took a relatively soft positionof political compromise on questions of legitimate succession to the caliphateand a moderate line on predestination. The emerging MuÀtazilites tended to beallied with this legal school. In the next generation came a reaction led byMalik ibn Anas (at Muhammad’s city, Medina), founder of the Malikites, whotook a vehemently literalist position against the rationalist theologians. ButMalik’s own pupil al-ShafiÀi founded a more moderate lineage (the ShafiÀites);they softened the emphasis on QurÁanic literalism by sanctioning the use notonly of the QurÁan but also of hadith, recollections of the Prophet’s companions,which could be used as a basis for interpretation. No doubt energized bythis controversy, major work was done in al-ShafiÀi’s generation to establish acanonical collection of hadith (see 68 and 69 in Figure 8.1). In counterpointcame the fourth of the main legal schools, the Hanbalis (followers of IbnHanbal), who used hadith to reinforce traditionalist views, and who vehementlyattacked the rational theologians.Liberal and conservative impulses tended to alternate during these generations,with the conservatives coming later and in reaction to the liberal side.The turning point came with a showdown over the political power of theliberals. The ÀAbbasid caliphate had taken power by military force, and itslegitimacy (like that of the preceding Umayyad caliphate) was disputed byvarious factions. The caliphs were casting about for religious legitimacy invarious ways, at times offering alliance with the ShiÀites, and bringing theminto their administration, at times supporting Sunni scripturalists, at othertimes patronizing the practitioners of kalam (Lapidus, 1988: 123–125; Massignon,1982: 250–254). In the early 800s, the ÀAbbasids were at the height oftheir economic prosperity and military power. Turning away from the QurÁanicconservatives supported by his predecessor Harun al-Rashid, the powerfulcaliph al-MaÁmun moved to establish theocratic control by championing thedoctrines of the MuÀtazilites. Among the central points was the doctrine thatthe QurÁan is created and not an eternal aspect of the divine essence. To enforcethis policy would be to reduce the independence of the scriptural caretakersof the QurÁan and justify the intervention of the caliph in interpreting religiouslaw.Islamic historians refer to this episode as the “Inquisition.” The pejorativeterm results from the eventual failure and disgrace of this effort. Under caliphal-Rashid (r. 786–809) there had been a persecution from the other direction,on behalf of the emerging school of hadith and against kalam, during whichthe head of the Baghdad MuÀtazilites, Bishr al-MuÀtamir, had been imprisoned(Watt, 1985: 53; Hodgson, 1974: 1:388–389). In 827 caliph al-MaÁmun attemptedto force religious scholars to accept the doctrine of the created QurÁan;al-MaÁmun died in 833, and his successors continued the policy intermittently402 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsfor 20 years. Most of the Àulama gave in under political pressure from thecaliphs; but opposition was tenaciously led by Ibn Hanbal, the most prominenthadith scholar, situated in the capital Baghdad itself. Ibn Hanbal became ahero of the conservatives by enduring imprisonment and threats of execution.Eventually in 847 caliph al-Mutawakkil capitulated to the political oppositionand abandoned the effort to impose the MuÀtazilite theology. The triumphantHanbalis in turn attempted to impose their own position. In future generationsthe Hanbalis became one of the leading legal schools, and the conservativeanchor of the intellectual field, taking the leadership in attacking theologicalmoderates as well as practitioners of philosophy.7The defeat of the “Inquisition” was a turning point in the structure ofIslamic religion and intellectual life generally. If the caliph had won, Islamwould have been moved toward a more centralized and bureaucratic church,less centered on the local Àulama. Rational theology could have become institutionalizedrather than marginalized. Intellectual structures would have morenearly parallelled those of the Christian Church, centered on rational theologyrather than scripturalism and breeding its philosophical adjunct. Indigenoustheologically based Islamic philosophy displayed its own creative dynamicthrough these early generations, developing atomic occasionalism, theories offree will and of causality, proofs of the existence and nature of God, theoriesof time and motion, distinctions among primary and secondary qualities. Theperiod flashes with themes we associate with Zeno and Heraclitus, and againwith the successors of Descartes. That is to say, Islamic philosophy at this pointparallels developments in Greece and Europe prior to the dominance of Platoand Aristotle, and again after their overthrow. Creativity was not yet over, forit is fueled by conflict, and the shifting of external supports brought about arealignment of positions over the next few generations, and thus the innovativereorganization of intellectual space. But the center of gravity was pushedincreasingly toward the conservative side. The MuÀtazilites did not disappearfor several centuries,8 but they were frozen into a defensive posture from whichcreative energy had drained. Their decline opened a space in the intellectualfield; and it was this vacuum that imports of Greek ideas now proceeded tofill. Importing is less creative than indigenous construction. What Eurocentrichistory regards as the only worthwhile topic constituted in its time a declinein the creativity of Islamic networks.Importers of Foreign PhilosophyJust at the time when the MuÀtazilites were going into their political showdownand crisis, a concerted effort was made to import the “ancient learning” ofGreek science and philosophy into the Islamic world. It was at this point—theTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 403middle generation of the 800s—that a network of translators and commentatorssprang up in Baghdad. Sporadic translations of Greek texts had appearedbefore this point; and there were long-standing schools of Christian and othernon-Islamic scholars in various outlying places. But their work had producedneither novelty nor attention. In 830 Caliph al-MaÁmun—the same who attemptedto impose an Inquisition on behalf of MuÀtazilite theology—establisheda “House of Wisdom” at the capital, a bureau of translation supportingmany scholars.9 For the next three generations this network was active intranslating Greek science, mathematics, logic, and philosophy.It should be stressed that this group was tangential to Islamic intellectuallife. Most of its members were non-Muslims: they were Nestorian Christians(an excommunicated sect which had left the Byzantine Empire for Persiaaround 430 c.e.); a few were Jacobites (a wing of the Monophysite heresy inSyria of the mid-500s), Sabians of the old Babylonian star worshippers, occasionallyZoroastrians.10 They did not take part in the controversies of theÀulama over theological-philosophical issues. Their niche at first was as carriersof practical skills, as court physicians, astrologers, and astronomers. Sinceteaching in these professions took place by personal apprenticeship, this grouphad some concern with the transmission of ideas and texts. Once a criticalmass of such experts was assembled at Baghdad, it began the usual intellectualstruggle for attention, in this case concentrated on their distinctive culturalcapital, their access to textual traditions. Their claim to fame was not originalitybut possession of more texts, and eventually better translations.The science, medicine, and mathematics thus introduced were religiouslyneutral. But they did establish an occupational base for intellectuals outsidethe career of Muslim religious scholar, primarily as court physician or courtastrologer. Later we find that many of the prominent Muslim exponents offalsafa, from Rhazes and Ibn Sina down to Ibn Rushd (Averroës) and AbuÁl-Barakat, were doctors. Philosophical creativity within these roles did not comeabout until the translation movement was over. During the early generations,idea imports were a substitute for creativity.The main area in which this did not hold was in mathematics and astronomy.In the first generation of the House of Wisdom appeared al-Khwarizmi,from a Zoroastrian family. He coined the term al-jabr, translated by theEuropeans as “algebra,” while “algorithm” was taken from his name; he laidout basic principles for solving equations of the first and second degree. Ageneration later the Sabian Thabit ibn Qurra developed versions of integralcalculus, spherical trigonometry, and analytic and non-Euclidean geometry, andreformed Ptolemaic astronomy (DSB, 1981: 7:358–365; 13:288–292). Translationswere made of Greek mathematics, from Euclid and Archimedes toPlutarch and Diophantus, along with the science of Aristotle and Galen. It is404 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsstriking that the areas in which creativity occurred are not simply those inwhich prestigious Greek texts were introduced but rather areas in which therewas a cross-connection of imports from India—apparently in the form not oftextual translations but of practical knowledge. Thus, Thabit ibn Qurra beganas a money changer in Harran (DSB, 1981: 13:288), and al-Khwarizmi, anIranian from the Oxus delta, appears to have introduced the decimal systemof Indian numerals (i.e., what Europeans call Arabic numerals). A single lineof imports tends to stifle creativity; this is circumvented by multiple andheterogeneous sources of imports, which reinstate the creative competition andrecombination of ideas.This scientific creativity remained largely insulated from philosophy. ButGreek cultural capital was now spilling over into the sphere of Arab intellectuals.The first to take advantage of it was al-Kindi, who happened to be closestto the scene, in his position as court overseer of the translators at Baghdad.The result of his labors was not very original; he popularized Greek learningin Arabic, writing an encyclopedic range of treatises across all the sciences, notomitting logic and philosophy. He had contacts with the Baghdad school ofMuÀtazilites—then at the height of their political dominance—and he made aneffort to accommodate Greek philosophy to Muslim theological issues. Titlesof his books indicate he wrote on such MuÀtazilite themes as atoms, theessences of bodies, and the unity of God (Watt, 1973: 207–208). Al-Kindi’sown position was largely Neoplatonic, but modified to defend theologicandoctrines of the creation of the world ex nihilo, the possibility of miracles andprophecy, and God’s eventual destruction of the world. Al-Kindi’s position wasessentially eclectic, and was adopted neither by the theologians nor by theGreek-oriented falasifa. As the latter position came into its own after 900, ittook a stronger stand, in opposition to theological particularism, in the formof Neoplatonism championed by al-Farabi. By this time al-Kindi’s importancehad faded, and the period of translating Greek texts was largely over.The Sufi Cult of Religious ExperienceWhat became known as the Sufis (after suf, the wool cloak worn by wanderingascetics) began to appear in the 700s and 800s as an outcropping of ecstaticreligious persons apart from the teachers at the official mosques. Some werewandering preachers; some were ultra-ritualists, making pilgrimages to holyplaces and saying prayers every step of the way; some were visionaries, whoclaimed a personal flash of divine contact or inspiration. There was at this timeno emphasis on the practice of meditation or systematic methods for inducingvisions. A frequent theme was asceticism, giving away one’s goods and wanderingin poverty, along with practicing sexual celibacy; yet the Sufis did notTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 405usually become organized into a monastic life, although there were later a fewapproaches to it, such as the spiritual community which al-Ghazali formed inPersia. In the early period, asceticism was widely displayed as a badge ofreligious commitment by members of various positions, including some of thefamous MuÀtazilites. Later, when Sufism spread as a mass movement, it generallywas organized as lay brotherhoods of persons who practiced ordinarytrades but who met periodically for religious initiations and activities.Sufism never broke organizationally from the conventional structures ofIslamic society and religion; it provided supplementary communities in whichmen from all walks of life (and in rare instances women) could participate.The common theme of this rather inchoate Sufi movement was an emphasison personal religious experience, away from the collective public rituals suchas the five-times-daily prayers at the mosques and other public observances.The more radical Sufis carried this to an anti-ritualistic, anti-conventionalextreme: the externals of the pilgrimage to Mecca were nothing, and one mightbreak even the most sacred rules to demonstrate one’s inner commitment to aspiritual level transcending anything visible.This tendency in Sufism took up the opposite side of the field from thescripturalists of the juridical schools and especially the collectors of hadith. Itis not surprising to find the archconservative Ibn Hanbal polemicizing againstal-Muhasibi (65 in Figure 8.1), who helped to crystallize Sufism from piousasceticism into full-blown mysticism. In the same generation (the mid-800s),we find at Baghdad the even more radical Sufi al-Bistami; influenced by anIndian teacher, he declared his identity with the Divine with the words: “Gloryto me, how great is my glory!” Such radical expressions could be gotten awaywith, if just barely, during the period of upheaval in the struggle betweenMuÀtazilites and their opponents, with the defeat of the Inquisition. Even withsuch outrageousness, Sufism was becoming organized. As we see in Figure 8.1,the major Sufis were connected in lineages and centered on the main places ofintellectual action, Basra and Baghdad; they were part of the division of theintellectual attention space. The leading figure at the end of the 800s, al-Junayd,drew on both Bistami and Muhasibi, and unified Sufism with an analyticallyargued theosophy. His pupil in turn was the famous al-Hallaj, who studiedwith all the Sufi networks, debated with the MuÀtazilites, and had personalcontacts with Rhazes, the heretical philosopher.Radical Sufis, as enemies of scripturalists, were capable of making allianceswith all sorts of intellectual positions. Both a Neoplatonist like Ibn Sina andan antagonist of philosophy like al-Ghazali could have Sufi teachers andcontacts; and we find Ibn Massara (1 in Figure 8.4), the first Muslim philosopherin Spain, setting up a school for both MuÀtazilite theology and Sufism.The fact is that Sufism had no hard kernel of doctrine one way or the other;406 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsit was simply an organized flux of religious energy sweeping around Islamicsociety on the loose organizational pathways of popular respect for religiouspiety, plus a politically generated distrust of the official expressions of religiousritual. How this vague religious experience was interpreted depended on thestructures that divided the intellectual world at any particular time. Mysticalexperience, trans-intellectual though it may be, is always interpreted in termsof ideas, and these are produced by the historical networks of the intellectualcommunity.The radical al-Hallaj epitomizes a particular interpretation of Sufi mysticism(Massignon, 1982). It is a philosophical vision of the world capped by adivine reality beyond words and concepts; compared to this the world itself isunreal, and the individual experiencing this vision loses all sense of duality andbecomes absorbed into the divine light and power. In 922 the outraged authoritiesresponded to al-Hallaj’s claims with ritual vehemence, mutilating, torturing,crucifying, and burning his body, while from his cross al-Hallaj ecstaticallycalled to the Baghdad crowd: “I am the truth!” For all the monstrousness ofthis drama, it is a product of the social structure of the intellectual field.Al-Hallaj did not depart from Islamic society into the periphery, experiencinghis mystic union in remote solitude; he challenged Islamic religious power inits capital. His was not an inspired idiosyncracy; he was a direct pupil of thelineages of the most important Sufis. In Figure 8.1 we see the Sufi networks,which had been building up for five generations, brought together in al-Hallaj.And he was an intellectual cosmopolitan, with connections to all the importantfactions of his day. Even his doctrine of extreme person-centered pantheismwas itself a version of Neoplatonism, just then emerging as the dominantposition among the falasifa. Al-Hallaj’s extraordinary self-confidence, deliberatelyprovoking martyrdom, was a boiling-over of emotional energy at a timewhen the intellectual community of Islam was maximally focused.Realignment of Factions in the 900sThe early 900s were a time when all the structural tendencies of intellectuallife came to a head. In Figures 8.1 and 8.2 we notice in this generation the firsttwo really dominant figures in Islamic philosophy: al-Farabi and al-AshÀari;Saadia, the first major Jewish philosopher;11 plus a concentration of notablesecondary figures, including Abu Bakhr al-Razi (Rhazes),12 the most importantsecular and anti-religious philosopher; the Sufi extremist al-Hallaj; plus notablelogicians (Matta), developers of rational theology (al-Maturidi), and the lastcreative MuÀtazilite (Abu Hashim). This was also the generation in whichoccurred a crucial event for Islamic theological politics: the long-standingImamite pretenders to the caliphate withdrew from active political oppositionTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 407by formulating the doctrine of the hidden Imam, with its implication that aninner faith would substitute, during the indefinite future, for political activism.If we separate the Jewish positions (since they would have been ignored by theMuslims, and in any case paralleled Muslim factions), we still find seven oreight distinctive stances struggling for attention in the intellectual field (seeFigure 8.2). This strains the limits of the law of small numbers, and it is notsurprising that only a few of these positions were successfully propagated tosucceeding generations.Most of these thinkers were at Baghdad. Basra had had its last gasp ofactivity; by the end of the century, its lineages had shifted to Nishapur, far tothe east in Persia. Baghdad hung on for a few more generations, but hereafterits philosophers became increasingly embattled by anti-intellectual forces. Alreadyby the end of the 900s, Persian cities such as Rayy (near modern Tehran)were becoming rival centers, and henceforth creativity was much more scattered,not only in Persia but also in central Asian Khwarazm and Afghanistan,as well as back to the Mediterranean coast, where Cairo, Damascus, andAleppo acquired intermittent prominence. With this geographical dispersion,in later centuries the philosophical networks became less concentrated, theircreativity more sparse.Greek philosophy, falsafa, had by the early 900s largely passed the era oftranslations. The philosophers and logicians up to now had been almostentirely non-Muslim—Christians, together with some Sabians (Babylonian starworshippers) among the astronomer-mathematicians. Since translation ceasedto be patronized by the court, the main social support of falsafa was thepractice of medicine. In the Greek medicine of antiquity, the doctor was notmerely a dispenser of cures but a public figure; arguing and lecturing was amajor part of legitimating medicine at a time when its practice was not veryeffective. This style carried over into the Islamic context. Isaac Israeli, the firstnotable cosmopolitan Jewish philosopher, was a court physician at Tunis. Hismedical books, translated from Arabic into Hebrew and Latin, were morefamous than his philosophy, and served as the medium by which his name asa philosopher became known. The same would happen to another doctor, IbnSina.Galen’s and Aristotle’s logic was part of the medical apprenticeship andprovided the terrain on which took place much of the innovations of thefalasifa. Logic was treated broadly, as a means of classifying the disciplines ofknowledge and expounding the modes of reality as well as of argument.13The doctor Abu Bishr Matta, and his pupil al-Farabi, and in turn his pupilYahia ibn ÀAdi (another doctor), led the logical developments of the “Baghdadschool”; two generations later, Ibn Sina would construct the most comprehensivetreatment of logic to date.408 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFIGURE 8.2. ASHÀARITES, GREEK FALASIFA, AND THE SYNTHESESOF IBN SINA AND AL-GHAZALI, 935–1100Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 409Al-Farabi was one of the few Muslims in this group, and he made hismark by transmuting its cultural capital into Islamic terms. An independentlywealthy individual living quietly without court patronage, he dedicated himselfto gathering everything he could from the cosmopolitan network, seeking outthe leading teachers and traveling as far as Byzantium. Al-Farabi representsthe culmination of idea importing into Islam. He surveyed all the availableGreek works and enumerated all the natural sciences, the main concern of theBaghdad translators, systematizing everything into a Neoplatonic hierarchy ofemanations. Al-Farabi was most original in adapting Plato’s Republic to Islamicconditions: the Prophet, as head of Islam, is the true philosopher-king;just as the universe emanates from the absolute One, the successive ranks ofpolitical hierarchy emanate from the political head. Al-Farabi implies that afterthe Prophet, the headship is delegated to a being of secondary grade, whosequalities and powers are lessened. The vagueness of al-Farabi’s formulation isperhaps a deliberate appeal to cover all factions; the “second head” could beequally the caliph, the Àulama, or even the ShiÀite Imam. Al-Farabi’s hallmarkis political caution and the avoidance of theological disputes. His Neoplatonismis a religion of reason, combining the naturalism of the sciences with themost abstract and general form of Islam that he could safely espouse.Why would this religion of reason now rise to dominance in the networkof philosophers? External political forces helped move the network in thisdirection. Islam, originally a religion of the Arabs, was pressuring its subjectpeoples to convert. Zoroastrians had already been persecuted and largelyeliminated in the 800s. In 932–934, the caliph launched a persecution ofSabians, and the last of them in the scientific network (notably 105 and 127in the key to Figure 8.2) converted to Islam. Christians came under increasingpressure, although we find them in the network of Yahia ibn ÀAdi’s successorsdown into the next century. The Muslim intellectuals who inhabited thesecircles had no reason to defend Christianity or any other religion; their structurallocation motivated them to take a studied neutrality. The freethinker Ibnal-Rawandi took the most dangerous stance, claiming the autonomy of science,superior to religion. Al-Farabi’s contemporary Rhazes even more explicitlyrejected the clashing religious sects; he held that prophecy is superfluous to thelight of reason, and indeed the cause of violence among religious rivals (Fakhry,1983: 105). Rhazes, one of the first Muslims among the elite medical doctors,drew widely on the cosmopolitan communities intersecting at Baghdad, fromIndia as well as Greece. Rhazes postulated a system of co-eternal principles,including atoms moving continually in the void, souls undergoing a cycle ofrebirths, and a creator-God who sets in motion these preexistent materials.Rhazes’s eclectic synthesis was condemned on all sides; in his grandpupils’generation it would be picked up by another heretical group, the secret Brethrenof Purity.410 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsAl-Farabi’s philosophy was an attempt to be politically safe, avoiding thedynastic partisanship inherent in the various Sunni and ShiÀite theologies. Inthis respect he moved onto MuÀtazilite turf, an earlier attempt at a religion ofreason and a neutral stance on dynastic issues. Increasingly powerful enemieswere now accusing the MuÀtazilites of heterodoxy. This was the final generationin which anything creative would come from them in philosophy. Otherpractitioners of kalam, notably al-AshÀari and his followers, were retreatingtoward a more conservative position. The Neoplatonism of al-Farabi is thekind of structure-driven creativity which emerges to fill an emptying slot in theintellectual field as external political forces destroy their social bases. Al-Farabi,like al-Kindi before him, attracted no notice from his contemporaries in thenetworks of Muslim theology. This gave him a certain amount of safety; onoccasion he fled Baghdad to avoid political troubles. As the Christians disappearedand MuÀtazilites faded out in the next few generations, al-Farabi’sphilosophy was the one that survived and prospered. Later falasifa, as well astheir critics, came to regard al-Farabi as preeminent.The Crystallization of Rational Theology in a Conservative DirectionFor Muslim intellectuals, the big news of the early 900s would have been thesplit which took place in the MuÀtazilite camp. Al-AshÀari, pupil of the headof the Basra school, al-JubaÁi, denounced the MuÀtazilites in 912 and announcedhis reconciliation with the hadith scripturalists. Al-AshÀari now admittedthat the QurÁan is not created; using the distinction of essence and existence,he met objections by showing that any particular copy of the QurÁanis created, whereas its essence is eternal. There was some personal rivalry inthis move, as the Basra headship was passed at just this time to al-JubaiÁs son,the acute metaphysician Abu Hashim. But the break was not merely personal,as we can see by the fact that MuÀtazilite creativity more or less dried up atthis point, while the AshÀarite lineage prospered; its future generations wouldinclude the important thinkers al-Baqillani, al-Juwayni, al-Ghazali, and al-Sharastani (as we see in Figure 8.2). Moreover, among al-AshÀari’s contemporarieswas al-Maturidi, in far-off Samarqand, who founded another lineage oftheological moderates, somewhat closer to the MuÀtazilites on the issue of freewill (Watt, 1973: 312–316). The theological factions were being revamped atthis time across the board, on both the Sunni and ShiÀite sides.If the AshÀarites were the most prominent lineage philosophically, it wasbecause they had accumulated the intellectual capital of the MuÀtazilite debates.14 The AshÀarites firmly adopted time-atomism as their metaphysics. Aswe have seen, this doctrine emerged only gradually and with many disagreementsin the MuÀtazilite camp; and in fact the strongest statement of timeatomismby a MuÀtazilite came from al-KaÀbi (109 in Figure 8.1), a contem-Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 411porary of al-AshÀari. By the time of al-Baqillani, the AshÀarites were laying outtime-atomism systematically as their own doctrine. The impression widespreadin the West that Muslim theology is fatalistic, holding that an all-controllingGod determines everything that happens in the world, is the result of theorthodox stamp which the AshÀarites put on this MuÀtazilite doctrine.The MuÀtazilite-AshÀarite network, for all the concessions the latter madeto scripturalism, took indigenous Muslim philosophy toward issues comparableat many points to positions later argued by the famous philosophers ofmedieval Christendom and early modern Europe. Let us note the following:1. Al-AshÀari rejected the MuÀtazilites’ extreme emphasis on the unity ofGod in order to agree with the traditionalists’ view that God has positiveattributes (power, knowledge, life, and so on as described in the QurÁan). Thesecannot be considered identical with God’s essence; but they are eternal, andsubsist in God’s essence (Fakhry, 1983: 53, 58–59, 204–205, 214–215). Thisline of argument had already become acute with AshÀari’s MuÀtazilite teacheral-JubaÁi, and his son Abu Hashim. The latter worked out subtle distinctionsof state and attribute, moving along a path similar to that of Duns Scotus inthe Christian network four centuries later. Abu Hashim took the discussion ofbodies and their accidents to its most extreme step, holding that a body canbe stripped of all accidents except being. Other MuÀtazilites had argued aboutwhich attributes were most primordial; al-KaÀbi, the strongest advocate oftime-atomism, held that bodies can be divested of all attributes except color,while the AshÀarites distinguished between primary and secondary accidents,the former of which necessarily accompany substance, and include motion,rest, and location. The argument looks something like Locke’s primary andsecondary qualities, although the AshÀarites went on to include among primaryaccidents features such as taste and smell, dampness and dryness, heat andcold. The primary-secondary distinction was not worked out with the radicalnessof Locke because the level of abstraction upheld by the intellectualnetwork did not remain very high.2. The AshÀarites held that God’s decrees are fiat, independent of andsuperior to any rational or moral conditions. Al-Baqillani argued that if Goddesired, he could have created an entirely different world, or refrained fromcreating the world at all. Here we have a position like that which was takenby Duns Scotus and the Ockhamists, emphasizing the unlimited and miraculouspower of God’s will. The condemnation of Averroist determinism by theParis authorities in 1277, which led to this conception of the unlimited powerof God, is structurally paralleled by the political condemnation of the MuÀtazilites’rational restrictions on God as following from his unity and justice. Inboth cases a philosophy is constructed which extends the implications of theopposite position.412 • Intellectual Communities: Western Paths3. The mature MuÀtazilite and AshÀarite time-atomism foreshadows theoccasionalist system of Malebranche. In the latter’s system there is a psychophysicalparallelism in which bodies are moved not by the human will but byGod. Malebranche, a priest arguing against the mechanistic worldviews of the1600s, was doubtless not imitating the Muslims; it is simply that in both cases,the type of argument serves to make God omnipresent even within a worldwhich philosophical argument has concluded consists of material substances.4. By the late 900s, the AshÀarites denied that there are unchanging essencesand eternal laws (Wolfson, 1976: 543–544; Fakhry, 1983: 210–212). Movingto the opposite pole from the Neoplatonists, now on the scene among thefalasifa, they held that facts are concrete and particular. Al-Baqillani’s versionof atomic instants held that every particular event is produced by the will ofGod; God may make a sequence of repetitive events, but there are no naturallaws, no necessity of repetition. Here the argument foreshadows Hume’s denialof causality, and paves the way for al-Ghazali’s anti-causal argument in theAshÀarite lineage three generations later. Al-Baqillani also held that bodies inthemselves can have any sort of qualities; that they have one particular formrather than another requires a determinant, which implies the existence of God.This also makes explicit the notion of contingency, which was to be stressedby Ibn Sina and by al-Juwayni.5. The MuÀtazilites and AshÀarites worked out a series of proofs of theologicalpositions: for the existence of God; for God’s unity; for the creation ofthe world ex nihilo; against the Aristotelean preexistence of matter and eternityof the world. Abu-Àl-Hudhayl, in the early 800s generation, produced anargument for the creation of the world that was to be characteristic of kalam:all accidents are generated; all bodies have accidents (including the accident ofbeing composite); hence the world as a body must be generated (Davidson,1987: 134–136). About the same time al-Nazzam held that an infinite cannotbe traversed, and that one infinite cannot be greater than another infinite; thesepoints imply the finiteness of the world in time (Wolfson, 1976: 416–417).Saadia summarized related MuÀtazilite arguments for creation, such as theargument that if past time were infinite, then the original cause of existencecould never reach me; since I exist, there must be a temporal beginning (Hymanand Walsh, 1983: 348). The procedure of kalam was to prove the creationfirst, then use this as basis for the proof of a creator. The Jewish academiescame alive in this period through factional arguments between Karaites andRabbanites, paralleling kalam and hadith; they were similarly concerned withreasoned critique or defense of anthropomorphic images in holy scripture. Suchproofs became one of the staples of Jewish philosophy leading up to Maimonides.15These issues, more than anything else, propelled Islamic philosophy in theTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 413direction of explicit proofs and conceptual analysis. More subtle argumentswere added in the next centuries, especially in the AshÀarite lineage (al-Baqillani,al-Juwayni, al-Ghazali); for instance, the proof that if an object (theworld) has particular characteristics but could have had others, there must besomething (God) which caused it to be particularized (Davidson, 1987: 174–178). This line of argument, foreshadowing Leibniz’s principle of sufficientreason, was developed by al-Juwayni in the mid-1000s. Further subtleties aroseas the creationists debated Aristoteleans over the eternity of the world. Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, and later Ibn Rushd (Averroës) responded to kalam bydistinguishing among different types of infinities and infinite regresses (Davidson,1987: 127–143). Ibn Sina broke ground beyond these cosmological proofsby arguing on the basis of analysis of the concepts of necessary and possiblebeing.16 By the time of al-Ghazali (al-Juwayni’s pupil), it had become possibleto point out that even a proof of the existence of a creator or first cause doesnot prove its unity or incorporeality, and that philosophy comes up againstepistemological limits beyond which it must cede to religious authority.6. The payoff of this accumulation of arguments is not only in the philosophiesof Ibn Sina and al-Ghazali; it is also already found in al-Baqillani, thefirst systematizer of the AshÀarite position. In order to undergird his timeatomismand his proofs of God and creation, al-Baqillani set forth a theory ofknowledge. He divided knowledge into God’s eternal knowledge and creatures’knowledge, and the latter into what is known through the senses, throughdiscourse, or authoritatively through history or revelation. Among necessaryknowledge he included knowledge of one’s own existence; here we have the“cogito ergo sum,” but al-Baqillani did not separate its indubitability fromthat of other sensory knowledge. Al-Baqillani’s epistemology is uncritical andnot very sophisticated. But the emergence of epistemology is itself a breakthrough.Further AshÀarite systematizers in this lineage, such as al-Baghdadi(167 in Figure 8.2) and al-Juwayni, also now based their expositions on anepistemology. The major conceptual ingredients for more abstract and criticalphilosophy were in place, on which was built the creativity of Ibn Sina andal-Ghazali.The ShiÀite Alliance and the United Front of HeterodoxiesThe 900s mark a turning point in the intellectual and political history of Islamand in their connecting link, religious politics. Religious factions lined up fora power showdown. The large number of Sunni legal schools had winnoweddown to a few main schools of law; the earlier struggle between hadith andQurÁan as scriptural basis was now resolved by inclusion. On the ShiÀite side,the old factional opposition, once fragmented among many contenders, became414 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsunified as well. The ShiÀites posed a danger not only of military uprisings onthe periphery but also in the core of the empire; in Baghdad itself, the ShiÀitesmade up 30 percent of the population (Massignon, 1982: 240, 252). In theearly 800s, Caliph al-MaÁmun had attempted to negotiate a settlement byoffering the succession to the current ShiÀite pretender; the failure of this moveled to the ill-fated Inquisition, an attempt to assert caliphal autonomy fromtheological factions (Lapidus, 1988: 124). Now, in the early 900s, the caliph’sregime was full of ShiÀite administrators, especially in finances and tax collection,though reserving the executive branch for Sunnites; his personal staff wasdrawn from MuÀtazilites. There was constant concern for ShiÀite rebellions inthe provinces and conspiracies at court. In this context, al-Nawbakhti (100 inFigure 8.1), a wealthy Baghdad businessman involved in court finances, formulatedthe doctrine of the Hidden Imam. The Imam was the alleged successorto the Prophet, on the side which lost the earliest civil war. Al-Nawbakhti nowheld that the twelfth Imam was in hiding, and would reappear at some timein the future to establish the reign of justice. This also meant giving up concreteclaim to the succession and transforming the Imam into a transcendentalsymbol, depicted as a luminous divine substance transmitted to a humanintermediary in each generation. A colleague of al-Nawbakhti (102 in Figure8.2) put the ShiÀites on a comparable basis with the Sunnites by formulatingtheir own canonical Imamite law and hadith.For a time the ShiÀite front won political support. The caliphate, which hadbeen gradually losing de facto power in the provinces since the mid-800s, wassubordinated in 945 by a Buwayid sultan. The Buwayids encouraged Imamism,as the doctrine no longer threatened rebellion in favor of an heir to the line ofAli, while it delegitimated the caliphate and was indifferent to secular rule. Thechief remaining ShiÀite faction, the IsmaÀilis, established a rival caliphate inTunisia in the early 900s, and conquered Egypt and Syria from the crumblingBaghdad caliphate in 970. No ShiÀite orthodoxy could be imposed, however.The empire continued to disintegrate, and the Sunnites shifted to other powerbases outside the crumbling capital—new conquering states from the east, aswell as the Sufi missionary movements spreading from within.Along with geopolitical disintegration and shifting religious fortunes cameintellectual realignment. On the Sunnite side were the bulk of the scripturalscholars in the law schools, along with the AshÀarite theologians and the Sufis.The eventual synthesizer of this entire alliance would be al-Ghazali. On theShiÀite side, appeared a coalition combining a new theology with themes of theentire non-orthodox philosophical and scientific community. Here the synthesiscame in two phases: first with the Brethren of Purity, then in more sophisticatedform with Ibn Sina.Intellectual history is driven by conflict, and therefore is full of ironicTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 415reversals. From the short-run perspective of the late 1900s, we are used toseeing the ShiÀites as archconservatives. In medieval Islam they were the radicalsand the intellectual cosmopolitans. In Figure 8.1, at the time of al-Nawbakhtiwe see the network of Baghdad Imamites casting around for allies,including both MuÀtazilites and the famous mathematician Thabit ibn Qurra,a Sabian star worshipper. In the late 900s, as the empire disintegrated, thevizier (140 in Figure 8.2) of the provincial court at Rayy (near modern Tehran)patronized both MuÀtazilites and Imamites, as well as a collection of scientistsand logicians. In this generation are clusters at Rayy, Baghdad, and Basra: aninterconnection of all the heterodox non-Sunni groups. The most famousamong them was al-Sijistani, a logician at the center of a literary discussioncircle at Baghdad; he was a pupil of Yahia ibn ÀAdi, and in the midst of theChristian logicians. His protégé al-Tawhidi (153 in Figure 8.2) was an eclecticpopularizer of heterodox positions, who acquired a reputation as the “archhereticof Islam.” Al-Sijistani was the reputed leader of a mysterious undergroundgroup at Basra, the “Brethren of Purity.”The Brethren’s position was an eclectic synthesis of non-Sunni heterodoxy.It asserted an allegorical interpretation of the QurÁan, combined with Neoplatonistemanation of souls and forms from God, and the Hermetic astrology ofthe Sabians (the line of Thabit ibn Qurra, friend of the earlier Imamites). Theyheld that the series of emanations reascends through minerals, plants, animals,and humans, the description of which gave the Brethren opportunity to showoff their scientific knowledge. All worldly things are ruled by particular numbers,according to the system of Neo-Pythagorean numerology which describesoccult correspondences among the levels. Astrology is given great significance;the planets not only foretell the future but also determine when each Imampasses from concealment to open rule, and when comes the periodic destructionof the world at the end of a cycle of 7,000 years. Human souls are arrangedin a hierarchy of ignorance, and are reincarnated Hindu-fashion, except forthose who are enlightened, who permanently ascend to the higher level of theIntellect. The Imam is the highest human, the point of contact with the Divine.He rules a hierarchy of initiates, divided into four levels, according to theirknowledge of the sciences.Organizationally, the Brethren’s secret society appears to have had somereal success in the underground of ShiÀite missionaries and conspirators; numerouscopies of their encyclopedic “Epistles” are found across many centuries.Their doctrine is eclectic and inconsistent among its various strands, andits appeal seems to have been more to the general populace than to intellectuals.It represents the last gasp of the old Basra-Baghdad cosmopolitans, huddledtogether in a defensive coalition while shifting to new social-religious bases ofsupport.416 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe Culmination of the Philosophical Networks:Ibn Sina and al-GhazaliIf the Brethren of Purity were an unsophisticated and popularistic synthesis,Ibn Sina in the next generation was a sophisticated one, the height of philosophyin the Islamic East. One can see in Figure 8.2 how networks of significantintellectuals simplified in his time, and even more so in the generation ofal-Ghazali: the Baghdad base began to be deserted; the Basra intellectuals wereno more. In the background, geopolitical and political shifts were pressing onthe bases of intellectual life. The Buwayhid sultans could not hold the remainingempire together. On the periphery in inner Asia and Afghanistan, conqueringstates expanded, the Ghaznavid Turks expanded from Transoxiana (southof the Aral Sea) into Persia; by 1055 they would conquer Baghdad and imposea puritanical Sunnism against the ShiÀites. The MuÀtazilites were already beingpersecuted in Iraq; their survivors spread east into Persia, and the moremoderate AshÀarites also shifted their main base to Nishapur in eastern Persia.The Ghaznavids caught doctrinal deviants in the other arm of a vise, burningbooks and killing the IsmaÀilis and other rebellious ShiÀite sects and the MuÀtazilites(Afnan, 1958: 73–74). Strict Sunni orthodoxy, starting from Baghdad,had spread east by 1000.Christianity and Judaism too were being squeezed out, along with theZoroastrians. The Sufis, now spreading among the people rather than amongthe intellectuals, acted as missionaries in Persia and inner Asia. There was areversal of the earlier Muslim tolerance of the other religions of the “peoplesof the book.” Previously, Islam was regarded as a privilege of the Arabs. Thiselitism declined as warfare and the destruction of the older conquering clansrearranged the class structure; we find now a combination of status-strivingon the part of non-Arabs, forced conversion by Muslim militants, and missionaryzeal. By 1000, Islam had become a majority religion in Iran and Iraq,eliminating most rival religionists. The network of falasifa, once primarilyChristian and Sabian, had been turned over to Muslim followers such asal-Sijistani, Ibn Miskawayh, and al-Biruni.Ibn Sina appeared in the generation when the Christians were disappearingand the intellectuals were migrating away from Baghdad. He was the son ofa provincial official at the very edge of the Muslim world, in the region of theAral Sea. Largely self-educated because of lack of accomplished teachers, heacquired his comprehensive knowledge through access to the library of thesultan of Bukhara. How could someone like this become the greatest Muslimphilosopher? In part because the old networks were now migrating for patronagetoward the new geopolitical powers on the periphery. Although Ibn Sinawas connected to none of the significant philosophers, he did encounter aTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 417Christian teacher of medicine (137 in Figure 8.2) from Baghdad (who thusprobably constituted a network connection to Yahya ibn-ÀAdi), who introducedhim to the issues debated at the center, and especially its logic. Medicine wasthe main social base for cosmopolitan intellectuals, and Ibn Sina made hisgreatest reputation through his encyclopedic synthesis of Greek and Arabicmedical texts. In addition, IsmaÀili missionaries who visited his father no doubtbrought him into contact with the “Epistles” of the Brethren of Purity.Most important, at the Khwarazm court the young Ibn Sina encounteredal-Biruni, one of the scientific stars of Islam (Afnan, 1958: 62–71; DSB, 1981:2:147–156). Al-Biruni was a great astronomer and a famous geographer, thefirst Muslim expert on India; a cosmopolitan both of thought and of travel,he connects back into the scientific network at Baghdad in its last generationof greatness, including the important mathematician and astronomer AbuÁ-l-Wafa al-Buzjani (147 in Figure 8.2), as well as to Christian logicians from thelineage of Yahya ibn ÀAdi. In the network we can see that the generations justbefore and after 1000 are nearly the last to be full of scientific stars: besidesthose just mentioned, there is Ibn Yunus (159) at Cairo, one of the greatestastronomers; Ibn al-Haitham (known to the Latins as Alhazen), famous forhis optics; and Al-Karaji (170) at Baghdad, who developed the arithmeticizationof algebra and the calculation of polynomials. Alhazen, contemporary ofal-Biruni and Ibn Sina, also migrated away from Iraq to new sources ofpatronage in Cairo. One can surmise that Ibn Sina first acquired creative energyfrom these contacts early in his career; his first field of endeavor was scientific,primarily medicine, and he also compiled new astronomical tables.When al-Biruni and the other stars of the Khwarazm court were called bythe conqueror to Ghazna, Ibn Sina fled in the other direction. He moved intowestern Persia, becoming court physician, sometimes vizier, and sometimesliving under private patronage at Rayy, Hamadan, and Isfahan, embattledstates between the crumbling Baghdad empire and the expanding Ghaznavids.It appears that he was fleeing the religious intolerance of the conqueror; histravels are reminiscent of those of Descartes, who moved between Catholicand Protestant battle lines during the European religious wars; both sought asafe spot in the middle where they could take advantage of the opportunitiesfor intellectual synthesis opened up by the rearrangement of cultural connections.Ibn Sina turned from his Canon of medicine to composing an encyclopediaof philosophy. He took over the Neoplatonic cosmology of al-Farabi and theAristotelean logic developed by the Baghdad school of Christian logicians, buthe formulated metaphysical issues in their own right and with a thoroughnessand depth that went beyond anything in his predecessors. His originality isseen above all in the prologue which he adds to the Neoplatonic system. Before418 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsplunging into describing the levels of emanation that make up the cosmos, hebuilds a foundation of systematic definitions and proofs. In other words, heintegrates Neoplatonism around the problems bequeathed by kalam: the natureof substance and attributes, proofs of God and the creation of the world.To begin at the beginning, Ibn Sina holds, is to study being, the mostfundamental of all concepts. He proves this with an argument that foreshadowsDescartes’s cogito but is used for a different purpose. Imagine a man flying ina dark and completely empty space; though he would know nothing of sensoryqualities or material bodies, he would unquestionably know that he exists.17When the senses are restored, these would show only further modifications ofbeing.Although there is no other notion prior to being, it admits distinctions. Themind can think of what something is—its essence or “whatness” (as theChristian scholastics would say, its quiddity)—without its actually existing,and even without its possibly ever existing. Existence is thus superadded toessence, making up the two fundamental aspects of being. This distinction wasan old one, found in Aristotelean logic. But Ibn Sina does not merely leave hisdistinctions within a logical treatise; in his al-Shifa he elevates them to metaphysicalprinciples as the foundation of an ontological system (Afnan, 1958:115–130; Davidson, 1987: 281–310; Hyman and Walsh, 1983: 241–255).Within existence, Ibn Sina adds the further distinction between necessarybeing—that of which to assume its non-existence would lead to an impossibility—and non-necessary being. Ibn Sina criticizes the theologians and logiciansfor failing to make adequate distinctions; they define “necessary” and “possible”in a circle, in terms of each other. Ibn Sina argues that there is a furthercategory, the contingent: that which is neither necessary nor impossible. Thuswe can conceive of (1) being which is necessary of itself, and (2) being whichis merely possible in itself but necessary as the result of some external cause.If a being were necessary purely of itself alone, it could contain no internaldistinctions; it would have to be unified, simple, and incorporeal: in short, itwould be God. Does such a being exist? Ibn Sina notes that since we knowsomething does exist, it must be of either type (1) or type (2). If it is the former,the proof is complete. If it is the latter, it must depend on a separate being tomaintain it in existence; and that can only be (1). A being with all thecharacteristics of God must accordingly exist; and the rest of the world can belogically derived from it.If Ibn Sina reaches a high level of abstraction, it is because he builds onthe whole preceding Islamic intellectual community. The central problems thathe sets for himself—to delineate the attributes of God; to show how the worldwas created; to demonstrate the different components of what we call causality—were those around which Muslim rational theologians had traded accu-Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 419sations of heresy. Ibn Sina was in a position to stand back and survey the wholedevelopment, and then systematically set forth the fundamental metaphysicalterms in which these issues could be resolved. To de-particularize this development,one should say that the Muslim intellectual community after eightgenerations of debate had pushed these problems to successively higher levelsof abstraction; Ibn Sina was the individual in whom the process reached anexplicit metaphysics, detached from theology, and systematized into a comprehensivechain of proofs. Proofs of the existence of God go back to the MuÀtazilitetheologians; chains of logical argument were developed as technical skillsby the Baghdad specialists in this art; the Neoplatonic cosmology of emanationshad been Islamicized by al-Farabi and popularized by the Brethren ofPurity. Ibn Sina was heir to all these developments. His work is a grandsynthesis, carried out with a logical thoroughness that goes far beyond mereeclecticism. Structurally, his scholasticism represents the drawing together ofthe entire corpus of rational thought in Islam, at a time when the social spaceon this side of the field was closing down and the anti-rationalists werepalpably growing in strength.Ibn Sina, like other very great intellectuals, was an energy star. He wroteencyclopedically and fundamentally on numerous subjects. This outpouring ofenergy was what carried his work to later generations, despite the fact that hispersonal network broke off with a few minor local disciples. His philosophywas criticized and rejected by the Hanbali and AshÀarite theologians who nowdominated. Ibn Sina’s reputation was kept alive by his eminence in the worldof medicine; and it was along with his Canon that his philosophy eventuallyspread, via Spanish doctors and translators, into the Latin world under thename of Avicenna.Creative networks had become even thinner by the time of al-Ghazali.Figure 8.2 shows no rival philosopher in his generation of even secondaryimportance. He does, however, have significant network ties backwards andforwards in time: he was a pupil in the main line of AshÀarite theologians; hewas in the main intellectual centers of the time, Nishapur and Baghdad; andhis lineage led on to the relatively more important figures of subsequentgenerations. The fact remains that al-Ghazali’s generation had the thinnestnetwork of significant thinkers in the history of Islamic philosophy up to thistime; it was the turning point between the dense competition among rivalchains that characterized the heyday of the Basra and Baghdad networks, andthe later period of thinner and rather routinized networks of Sufis and madrasatheologians. The content of al-Ghazali’s thought incorporates this change; hisis the creativity of structural crisis.Al-Ghazali was connected with all the main trends of his time. Tolerationfor philosophy was disappearing. In Baghdad, violent outbreaks took place420 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsduring al-Ghazali’s youth. Al-Qushayri (188 in Figure 8.2), a Nishapur theologianfrom al-Ghazali’s own AshÀarite lineage, had been violently attackedby mobs stirred up by the Hanbalis in 1072. Ibn ÀAqil (201) was also violentlyattacked and forced to recant his use of kalam, rational methods. TheHanbalis were now so dominant that their own ranks had an internal split;Ibn ÀAqil was a Hanbali moderate, and we see in Figure 8.2 that he came froma branch of the Baghdad Hanbalis (177, 186, 202) that had been combininghadith with kalam. The last of this lineage (202) had to move to Damascus, asafer environment away from this persecution. Al-Ghazali too would go fromNishapur to teach at Baghdad, then flee the city as politics heated up again inthe 1090s.Not surprisingly, in this atmosphere philosophy declined. Ibn ÀAqil lamentedthat in his time there were no more serious thinkers (Watt, 1985: 102).Al-Ghazali’s one important contemporary was ÀUmar Khayyam; a famouspoet, he was even more eminent as a mathematician, developing techniquesfor extracting cube and square roots of algebraic equations. He and his pupilal-Khazini (210 in Figure 8.2) were the last two great scientific stars of theIslamic East for a century (DSB, 1981: 7:323–325, 335–351). ÀUmar Khayyamoverlaps with al-Ghazali’s networks: Khayyam was about 10 years older andhad studied at Nishapur before him. Khayyam and al-Ghazali had the samepatron, the Seljuk vizier Nizam al-Mulk, who appointed Khayyam head of thecourt astronomical observatory at Isfahan, and al-Ghazali to teach at the greatmadrasa which Nizam al-Mulk founded at Baghdad. Khayyam himself wrotephilosophical treatises late in his life; his poems, contemporary with the writingsof al-Ghazali, make disillusioned reference to his own contacts with the“two-and-seventy jarring sects” and to his student days at Nishapur:Myself when young did eagerly frequentDoctor and saint, and heard great argumentAbout it and about: but evermoreCame out by the same door where in I went.Khayyam’s advice is the same as al-Ghazali’s:Waste not your hour, nor in vain pursuitOf This and That endeavour and dispute.Al-Ghazali’s philosophy is an anti-philosophy. He was the great agent ofthe traditionalist reaction, but he was great precisely because he was a defectorfrom the core network, turning the weapons of philosophy against itself. LikeIbn Sina, whom he attacked, al-Ghazali had a commanding overview of thecultural capital of the Islamic intellectuals. He scrupulously set forth their viewsbefore refuting them; and he carried out the refutation not by fulmination butTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 421by using the highest techniques of argumentation. In The Incoherence ofPhilosophy he examines the proofs of the major propositions given by hisopponents and finds them wanting by stricter logical standards. His majorweapon is to attack the notion of necessary causality, using arguments likethose later made famous in Europe by Hume. For al-Ghazali, necessity islimited to logical relations; possibility excludes necessity, and hence the thingsof the world can become actual only through the action of a voluntary cause,God’s will.In this al-Ghazali justifies the traditional position of the AshÀarites: exaltingGod’s omnipotence so that God alone is the cause of everything that happensin the world. There are no spheres of emanation, no realm of secondary causeswhich diminish God. But kalam is not very important; it is useless for thereligiously healthy person unafflicted by doubt, while its ability to settle doubtsis far from perfect, as we can see by holding it up to the logical standards offalsafa. Here epistemological acuteness was raised by religious traditionalistsseeking to puncture the claims of rational argument. But al-Ghazali facedfurther problems on the religious front, especially the challenge of the IsmaÀilis,then in open revolt against al-Ghazali’s Seljuk patrons (Hodgson, 1974: 2:180–192). By what criterion could one tell if the IsmaÀili Imam were to be acceptedor rejected against Sunni religious claims? Reason cannot decide, since it leadsonly to recognizing the need for an authority beyond itself on ultimate matters.But there is a faculty capable of recognizing valid spiritual authority, and thatis the insight given by Sufi mystical experience. We have come a long way fromthe condemnation of al-Hallaj; Sufism of this sort is no longer a heresy, but isbrought close to the orthodox center.Al-Ghazali himself, after lecturing on conventional AshÀarite theology atBaghdad, underwent a personal crisis that caused him to withdraw fromteaching (al-Ghazali, 1951; Hyman and Walsh, 1983: 277). He recalls that hevacillated between giving up philosophy and continuing to teach (after all, heheld the preeminent chair in the Islamic world), until finally his tongue driedup in his mouth, whereupon he slipped away from the city to make a longpilgrimage in search of mystical experience. Al-Ghazali responded to the increasingprestige of the Sufi ideal replacing the decline of philosophy andkalam, for as he himself laments, the mystical experiences did not come; hewas motivated by a theoretical ideal. There were also political reasons for hisleaving Baghdad in 1095. It had been only 20 years since his AshÀarite predecessorshad been mobbed by the Hanbalis, and in 1092 his protector Nizamal-Mulk (who had reversed the policy of persecuting AshÀarites) was assassinatedby the IsmaÀilis. After al-Ghazali’s period of wandering in unsuccessfulsearch of mystical enlightenment, he returned to Nishapur and organized acontemplative community. His brother (211 in Figure 8.3) became a famousSufi, and their lineage established an AshÀarite version of Sufism.422 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsAl-Ghazali is the focus point at which all the trends of the time gathered.We see the disappearing basis for philosophy and the pressure on kalam; wesee the expansion of Sufism into respectability and its integration into thescholastic curriculum. For al-Ghazali also rides on a decisive change in theorganizational basis of intellectual production. Schools of law and theologywere ceasing to be lineages of private teachers assembling in the mosques. Nowthere were madrasas, formal foundations of properties supported by donorsor by the government. Al-Ghazali’s sponsor Nizam al-Mulk as vizier establishedmadrasas in every major city, shifting the basis of education and Islamicthought from ad hoc groups of teachers at the mosques into foundations undergovernment support. Nizam al-Mulk was no doubt following a trend alreadyin motion; his theological politics gave vigorous support to Sunnis againstShiÀites, and we find that competition between the sects was producing aproliferation of madrasa foundations on both sides (Nakosteen, 1964: 42–44).It is fitting that al-Ghazali should have produced the great conservativesynthesis, for he was teaching in the founding generation at the most importantmadrasa in the Islamic world. Al-Ghazali’s most enduring legacy for Islamicthought was not his acute philosophical skepticism, which was largely forgotten(Watt, 1985: 76), but the fact that he made logical methods respectableamong conservative theologians as a neutral tool that could be used for anycorrect form of thinking. Of all the heritage of the falasifa, logic was rescuedfrom destruction by al-Ghazali and his followers and incorporated into thecurriculum of the madrasas. It soon became part of a rather droning scholasticroutine.18Routinization of Sufis and ScholasticsAfter 1100, philosophical creativity became rather thin, at least in the Islamiceast; a brilliant episode was taking place in Spain, but encapsulated in the farwest. In the heartland of Islam, there was no longer the innovative strugglebetween multiple lineages densely intermeshing at great intellectual centers.Simplified networks of the relatively notable figures still existed; even the Sufipoets, rejectors of systematic thinking, tended to be offshoots of these networks.Thinner networks of theologians also continued, linking together themore significant names (see Figure 8.3).This was the great era of institutional Sufism. Already in the late 900s, theSufis were making alliances of respectability with the conservatives, and wefind Sufi Hanbalites proclaiming Sufism as a branch of the Àulama legalists (134and 135 in Figure 8.2). In the 1000s, Nishapur theologians (169, 188, and190) were drawing up registers of Sufis, collecting their biographies, explainingmystical terms in a scholastic manner. Contemporary with al-Ghazali therebegan a long series of foundings of Sufi orders. At least 12 Sufi orders aroseTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 423FIGURE 8.3. MYSTICS, SCIENTISTS, AND LOGICIANS, 1100–1400in the 10 generations from 1065 to 1400, founded at a nearly regular beat onegeneration after another.19 These orders were spread out geographically fromone end of the Islamic world to the other, from India to the Maghrib (westernNorth Africa). In central Asia and the eastern frontiers these orders were partof the missionary process that was spreading Islam. There was a spate of ordersin Anatolia as the Byzantine Empire collapsed in the 1100s and 1200s andIslam moved into the religious vacuum with the conquering Turks. Most ofthese frontier orders were not very significant intellectually, and their leaderswere unconnected to the philosophical networks. Their appeal was to laypersonsrather than to those with full-time religious vocations. They developedtheir distinctive varieties of rituals, dancing, chanting, music, meditation; theyvaried from politically activist to quietist. Most of the orders were geographicallylocalized and did not intersect with one another around significant figuresto form a network; the Sufi orders do not seem to have competed with oneanother, which is one reason why their structures generated traditionalismrather than philosophical innovation.Sufism also was spreading in the intellectual core of Islam. In the generationafter al-Ghazali’s death, a leading figure at Baghdad was ÀAbdulqadir Gilani(220), who became one of the most famous Sufi saints. He was a Hanbali intheology but also a visionary; the order that was later founded in his namearound the worship of his tomb stressed techniques for inducing ecstaticspiritual states. Gilani himself was rather unmetaphysical, and he attacked eventhe moderate and pro-Sufi kalam of the Ghazali brothers. Gilani’s pupil Abu-Hafs al-Suhrawardi (229) was appointed by the caliph as head of all Sufiestablishments in Baghdad; Sufism was getting government recognition and,where the government was powerful enough, regulation. Abu-Hafs in turn wasone of the teachers of the great Sufi poet SaÀdi; another pupil, NajmuddinKubra, founded a famous Sufi order which turned from pious asceticismtoward visionary speculation. As the networks became denser, even among theSufis, intellectual constructions were created. Kubra’s pupils in turn wereconnected to the philosophical mystic Ibn ÀArabi, as well as producing ageneration later the most famous Sufi poet. This was Rumi, active at the timeof the Mongol conquests, which destroyed Baghdad in 1258 and temporarilyleft Islam without a center of doctrinal enforcement. Perhaps this was whyRumi could get away with a radical pantheism without being accused ofheresy: “I am the mote in the sunbeam,” he declared; “I die a stone and becomea plant.”The period from the mid-1100s to the mid-1200s was the apex of creativityon the mystical side. Here are concentrated virtually all of the famous Sufipoets: foreshadowed by SanaÀi (227) in Afghanistan, where the Sufi orders werefirst forming; in the early 1200s, the great stars SaÀdi at Baghdad and Shiraz,Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 425ÀAttar at Nishapur; and in the next generation (and another part of the samenetwork) Rumi. Their poetic style is at the opposite pole from the argumentsand proofs of the philosophers; it is filled with anecdotes, especially stories ofthe spiritual impressiveness and sometimes the magic powers of the Sufi heroes,along with their cryptic sayings. The message is typically esoteric, deliveredthrough allegory and metaphor.In the same period, the intellectual networks are centered on two figureswhose fame came from combining philosophy with mysticism to producetheosophy: Shihabuddin Yahya Suhrawardi (not to be confused with Abu-HafsSuhrawardi in the same generation), and a generation later Ibn ÀArabi. Althoughtheir intellectual positions radically shifted from those of the philosophersand rational theologians, nevertheless their network connections aretypical of major intellectuals. Suhrawardi had studied widely with the mastersof the time; his network sibling, so to speak, is Fakhruddin Razi, the leadingAshÀarite and logician of the time, who shared with Suhrawardi the sameteacher (225). Ibn ÀArabi was a youthful acquaintance (Corbin, 1969: 41–43)of Ibn Rushd (Averroës), in the culminating generation of creativity in theIslamic west, who migrated east after Ibn Rushd’s funeral and the collapse ofthe Spanish networks. And the intellectual networks that remained after theirdays largely consisted of the descendants of Suhrawardi, Ibn ÀArabi, andFakhruddin Razi.Suhrawardi drew on the cultural capital of Neoplatonism, which wasstill being handed down in medical circles along with the medical writingsof Ibn Sina. His own Baghdad teacher (225) could well have been in theorbit of AbuÁl-Barakat, a Jewish physician and Muslim convert, who criticizedand combined elements from Ibn Sina and from kalam (Sirat, 1985: 133).Suhrawardi colored the Neoplatonic hierarchy with a different spiritual tone—more pantheistic and dramatically visionary. Reviving Zoroastrian religiousimages, Suhrawardi set forth a metaphysics of Light and Darkness. The essenceof material bodies is night, death, in themselves nothing more than corpses;light and life come from above, through a hierarchy of angels. Angels vary inintensity of luminescence, and these in turn produce the different species whichpopulate the world. The Aristotelean logical universal is only the dead bodyof an angel. Suhrawardi expressed an emotional antipathy to the logical andconceptual abstractions of the philosophers; he drew upon them to overturnthem for a more palpable vision. Perhaps inspired by the conflict between“eastern” and “western” logic that went on among the specialists (notablybeginning in the previous generation with AbuÁl-Barakat and his opponents),Suhrawardi proposed to build an alternative logic (Afnan, 1958: 105). In thisSuhrawardi had no notable success, but the project reveals how much hisgreatness came from his combination of ingredients.For Suhrawardi, the intermediary levels between the world and the divine426 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsare not abstraction or ideals; light is not a metaphor but the visible spectrumof brightness and color which literally produces the world below. The “Orient,”the home of light, is both the dawning place of knowledge and the risingsun, whose rays can illuminate the soul. There are temples of light in theintermediate cosmos, with archangels of purple and mystic green. The humanideal is to become the “perfect man,” the sage who combines philosophicalknowledge with mystical experience; he becomes the “Pole” of “the invisiblemystical hierarchy without which the universe could not continue to subsist”(Corbin, 1969: 22).Ibn ÀArabi produced a similar position, somewhat more coordinated withMuslim scriptures and less tied to the Zoroastrian religion of light. For himthe “universal man” contains the Platonic essences, which are the archetypessimultaneously of the macrocosm which is the universe and of the humanmicrocosm; these essences provide the ideal model toward which the personshould strive. The “universal man” rationalizes the powers of the scripturalprophets; he has a magical ability for seeing the esoteric significance in visiblephysical objects, like the ability of Moses to see God in the burning bush. Herethe position of Ibn ÀArabi and of Suhrawardi has turned away from thescientific causality incorporated into the lower regions of the world hierarchyby Neoplatonists like Ibn Sina or Aristoteleans like Averroës. Ibn ÀArabi’sphilosophy is a deliberate repudiation of the dying Spanish rationalist traditionfrom which he came. The cosmos was being reenchanted by the philosophers.We can see how far the intellectual atmosphere had changed from the time ofal-Ghazali, with his moderate use of kalam and his skepticism about metaphysicalconstructions. Al-Ghazali had attacked the esotericism of the IsmaÀilisand Imamites; now Suhrawardi and Ibn ÀArabi gave a philosophical basis forShiÀite belief that the Imam is the terrestrial pole of the cosmic Intelligences,or an angel hidden between heaven and earth (Corbin, 1969: 80–81, 86). Bythe mid-1300s, ShiÀite leaders (such as 291 in the key to Figure 8.3) wereidentifying Sufism with ShiÀism. At the same time, orthodox Sunni theologianshad incorporated Sufism into the curriculum of the madrasas. Sufism was bothsystematized and reconciled with kalam.By this time there was not much intellectual life left. There continued to benetworks (see Figure 8.3) connecting the more important teachers and pupilsall the way into the 1400s. But for the most part they were academics in theworst sense: unoriginal compilers of handbooks and summarizers of predecessors’texts (Rescher, 1964: 68–69, 76). The most innovative were scientists: inthe mid-1200s Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, one of the greatest astronomers of Islam,eliminated some of the Ptolemaic planetary eccentrics and foreshadowed theCopernican system (DSB, 1981: 13:508); his pupils and grandpupils carriedon the creative pulse. But scientific topics had grown marginal to Islamicintellectual life and faded from the attention space.Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 427The last important outbursts of philosophical creativity came from criticsof this syncretizing establishment. Ibn Taymiyah at Damascus in the early1300s was a Hanbali fundamentalist of the old style. He attacked rationalargument and denied that a Muslim could be a philosopher or practice logic.This seems anachronistic, since by now there had been little prominent Islamicphilosophy for generations. But Ibn Taymiyah was especially attacking thespeculative Sufism which was becoming the respectable orthodoxy of theschools, especially the illuminationism of Ibn ÀArabi and Quth al-Din al-Shirazi.Why his position should have emerged at Damascus and in this generationbecomes visible in the key to Figure 8.3: Syria along with Egypt had becomea center for what remained of logic and science since the disintegration of theSeljuk Empire in the 1100s, especially with the Mongol sack of Iraq in themid-1200s. The tide of foundations of Sufi orders was at its height, with threefounded in Taymiyah’s lifetime. Pressures for religious uniformity were growing.The last Crusader states had been conquered in 1291, and the long-standingChristian population under Islamic rule in Syria was finally converted.Taymiyah was a voice of traditionalism and intolerance. But he also waspart of the dynamics of the intellectual field, structurally motivated to punchholes in the accepted intellectual dogmas of the schools. He produced an acutecriticism of every component of syllogistic logic (Fakhry, 1983: 316–318).Definitions give no knowledge of what they define; self-evident propositionsleave their own basis hanging in air; the syllogism is based in universals, butit is useless because all being is particular. Taymiyah’s doctrines resemble thoseof William of Ockham, but they had none of Ockham’s revolutionary effecton his intellectual community. Whereas in Christendom the networks at thispoint of debate were at their point of maximal density, Taymiyah was isolated,and the creative impulse of his conservative opposition resulted in nothing.Two generations later, in the late 1300s, there was one more upsurge of criticalthought. Ibn Khaldun is best known for his universal history, a harbinger ofsociology, a secularism which kept its distance from theology and metaphysics.In the preface to his great work, Ibn Khaldun criticizes the rote learning oflogic in the madrasas. Here we find again arguments like Ibn Taymiyah’s (andOckham’s) rejecting the syllogistic arguments of the schools, excluding philosophyas useless, and advocating induction from empirical reality. But IbnKhaldun worked in Algeria, remote from the intellectual centers;20 indeed, thecentral networks no longer existed. Without significant structural ties of hisown, Ibn Khaldun’s critique was without consequences for Islamic philosophy.Spain as the Hinge of Medieval PhilosophyIt has been possible to bracket the golden age of Spanish philosophy—the fivegenerations bounded by Ibn Gabirol after 1035 to Maimonides and Averroës428 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsjust before 1200—from the rest of Islamic philosophy. Influences flowed fromthe east to this western end of the Islamic world, but little flowed back again.The later descendants of both the Muslim and Jewish intellectuals of Spain arefound to the north, across the religious frontier in Christendom. Althoughsubsequent Islamic philosophy continued in the east, a channel had divergedwhich drained into another sea; once emptied, it disappeared, leaving the twogreat realms of medieval philosophy, heirs of the Greek and eastern Mediterraneanculture, to their separate fates. The complex intellectual life at the timeof the Baghdad, Basra, and Nishapur centers was running out just as theSpanish episode began. The last great eastern thinker, al-Ghazali, in the generationjust before 1100, is most famous for his conservative attack, TheIncoherence of Philosophy. In Spain just the opposite was taking place, asspeculative philosophy flowered, and its greatest representative, Ibn Rushd(Averroës), delivered his rejoinder to al-Ghazali, The Incoherence of the Incoherence.Spain was a high point not only for Islamic philosophy but also for theJews; virtually all the innovative Jewish philosophers of the Middle Ages werefrom Spain, or closely tied to its networks. In addition to this double upsurgeof creativity, there is another structural anomaly about Spain: as we examinethe network charts, we find here the only connection between important Jewishand Muslim philosophers. And by way of the translators at Toledo, there is aconnection to the network of Christian philosophers based in northern France:from Gundisallinus to Adelard of Bath and Gerard of Cremona of the schoolsof Chartres and Laon. This is the only place where we find an explicit linkbetween the networks of Figures 8.1 through 8.5 and Figures 9.1 through 9.6,and the Jews center the chain. The period of greatest creativity in Spain wasalso the most cosmopolitan.It was here that the scientific and mathematical texts of the Greeks and theHindu-Arab algebra and number system were transmitted north; it was heretoo that Aristotle was revived, with such revolutionary effect on Christianphilosophy after 1200. We should resist the habit, however, of seeing thisperiod as nothing more than a transmission belt for ancient knowledge. Thereis a sociology of what is translated and how it is understood; intellectual historyin such times cannot be reduced to a slow-moving empiricism whereby textsrather than things are the objects which are gradually perceived.The Social Construction of Aristotle in Medieval SpainThe social process of importing ideas constructs the meaning of what is beingconveyed; and not only importing but exporting ideas can stimulate suchconstruction. The strongest instance of this is the so-called rediscovery ofAristotle. But Aristotle’s texts were not lost. In the earlier Middle Ages, Aris-Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 429totle was seen through the lens of Neoplatonism. In Christian Europe he hadbeen known since the time of Boethius (530 c.e.) mainly for his logic, in Latintranslation and through the introduction by Porphyry. As Plotinus’ follower,Porphyry elaborated Aristotle’s classification of the levels of abstraction fromgenera and species down to individuals as exemplifying Plotinus’ metaphysicalhierarchy of emanations. This was a reversal of ontological emphasis. ForAristotle the greatest reality is at the level of the concrete individual, whereasfor Porphyry and the Neoplatonists the true reality is the transcendent One,with each descending level more and more shadowy until the concrete individualis almost an illusion. This identification of Aristotle with Neoplatonismwas so firmly accepted that one of the most widely known texts circulatingunder his name was the so-called “Theology of Aristotle,” which actuallyconsisted of portions of Plotinus’ Enneads.For centuries Aristotle was regarded as part of the prevailing Neoplatonicworldview, merely adding some logical classifications and providing a vocabularyin which to discuss additional complexities regarding substance and form,potency and act. But although this is understandable for Christian Europe,where few Aristotelean texts were known before 1150, it does not explain thefact that the Arab philosophers interpreted Aristotle the same way. For translatorsat Baghdad had made available virtually all of Aristotle’s original textsby around 850–900 (Fakhry, 1983: 14–19). Yet al-Kindi and al-Farabi, whowere in the same networks as the translators, assimilated Aristotle to theirdominant Neoplatonism.21 Ibn Sina, three generations later, self-educated inthe provinces, had access to all of Aristotle’s texts in the library of the localprince. He claims that the one text he could not understand was Aristotle’sMetaphysics, which he read 40 times. Small wonder! He was trying to see itas Neoplatonic. It was only when Ibn Sina read al-Farabi that he saw howAristotle might be pressed into the dominant framework. There was no challengeto this distortion until the Spain of Averroës, in the generation 1165–1200. Averroës sharply attacked the interpretations of al-Farabi and Ibn Sina,and produced a massive commentary on Aristotle’s whole corpus, setting itfree from the framework of Neoplatonism. It was this commentary which wassoon translated and had such powerful repercussions in Christian philosophyin the 1200s and 1300s.22Why then did it take 300 years—nine generations of intellectuals—to breakthrough a gross distortion of perhaps the most famous of the classic philosophicaltexts of the time? There are two sociological questions here: Whatdetermined the prevailing interpretation of Aristotle against the grain of theexisting texts? And what made it possible suddenly to reinterpret the texts?The distortion was made possible in part because elements in Aristotle arecompatible with Platonic and Neoplatonic views. Although Aristotle had criti-430 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscized Plato’s doctrine of self-subsistent Forms, his own work is a criticalsynthesis incorporating Form as one of four causes, along with material,efficient, and final. In order to see the world as emanating downward fromForms, one would have to ignore Aristotle’s stress that Forms never exist apartfrom matter. Similarly, although Aristotle did not regard the world as createdby or flowing down from God—nor did he see God as something transcendingthe universe—his cosmology is hierarchic in a more concrete way. His astronomydepicts the earth surrounded by concentric crystalline spheres which carrythe moon, sun, and planets around in shells inside the sphere of the fixed stars.There is an idealist element in this, insofar as Aristotle needed something tomove each sphere; and just as the human body is moved by its soul, regardedas the Form of the body, each astronomical sphere is moved by its ownsoul/Form. God has a place in this physical system as the unmoved mover ofthe outermost heaven. Aristotle’s God does not move anything by efficient orformal causes, but exists only as the final cause toward which other things areattracted. The Neoplatonists, especially under religious impulses in Islam andin Christianity, could reinterpret this physical world-picture as if it were a seriesof metaphysical emanations. God was transformed from final cause into asource of Being and of Forms; each astronomical sphere could be identifiedwith a level of abstraction; angels could be inserted to move the spheres, or torepresent various levels of metaphysical reality above the spheres.For this reason, an interest in empirical science could reinforce rather thanundermine this Plotinian view of the world and its identification as Aristotle’s.The Baghdad translators also imported Ptolemy, Euclid, and Galen, and thesurrounding network of philosophers showed considerable interest in the empiricalsciences. The sciences were treated as filling in details of the overarchinghierarchic worldview. The same happened when Aristotle’s corpus first becameknown in Europe. Albert the Great, who even used Averroës’s commentaries,still saw the whole thing through Neoplatonic eyes. For Albert, the symmetryof the whole system provided a convenient framework into which new informationon gems, minerals, and plants could find its place as a grand compendiumof the sciences, and he saw no reason to break out of the Neoplatonicmetaphysical hierarchy to stress the materialist elements in Aristotle’s ontology.One can even say that there is a scientific core to the aspects of Aristotle thatare closest to Neoplatonist hierarchy. Aristotle’s logical classification of genus,species, and individuals was suggested by his biological researches; it wasAristotle’s attempt at a classificatory theory of his data that seemed to showthe existence of “higher” and “lower” levels. Scientific empiricism was nochallenge to hierarchical idealism, so long as it stuck to description andclassification of natural phenomena.Let us attempt to departicularize the historical context of the acceptanceTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 431of the Neoplatonic Aristotle. It was not only the Muslims until 1150, and theChristians prior to the upsurge of Averroism at Paris around 1260, who forcedAristotle into idealist garb. One can ask how Aristotle got into this mode inthe first place. This question has nothing to do with the transmission of texts.These were continuously available in the eastern Greek world from 50 b.c.e.on. We have seen in Chapter 3 how Aristoteleanism was gradually submergedbefore the dominance of the Middle Platonist schools, and the materialist sideof the field had been preempted by the Epicureans. Aristoteleanism becamepart of an eclectic middle ground of pagan religious politics. With the growingpower of Christianity, it became fused into the Neoplatonic pagan coalitionthat huddled together for strength against its external enemies. After the fallof the Roman Empire, none of the subsequent regimes was very favorable tophilosophy as an alternative to scriptural theology. In Islam the balance ofpower was strongly on the side of the theologians. Under the law of smallnumbers, this implies that the theological thinkers had more space to developoppositional schools than the secular philosophers, who had to maintain acoalition of defense; hence the continuation of the Neoplatonic fortress mentality.Possibly something like this also applies to philosophy in Byzantium,where little innovation is evident, and the more assertive philosophers such asMichael Psellos and Eustratios (in the generations just before and after 1100)were condemned by the authorities for intruding on theology (EP, 1967:1:436–439). What is to the point is that, although Islamic scholars at the timeof the Baghdad House of Wisdom (including Hunayn, Qusta ibn Luqa, andlater al-Farabi; DSB, 1981: 4:523, 11:244, 15:230) visited Constantinople insearch of texts, as did European Christian scholars in the mid-1100s (DSB,1981: 1:270), none of them got anything which challenged the prevailing viewof Aristotle.The Neoplatonist Aristotle was already a fait accompli when Aristotle wastransmitted into the Arab world. The acceptance of this interpretation was noforegone conclusion, given the availability of all the important original textsand the dynamism of the Islamic intellectual community. The law of smallnumbers suggests that the idea-importing faction in Islam had to maintain itsunity, a coalition of the weak against the attacks of the nativist theologians.If this is correct, we should expect the basis of the entire intellectual field tolook different in Spain at the time when Averroës broke up the Neoplatonistcoalition.The Hinge of the Hinge: Realignment in Jewish PhilosophyThe Jews formed the hinge of intellectual development in Spain, and theyunderwent a crucial shift in their relationship to their host communities at justthe time of the Spanish creativeness in philosophy.23432 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsJudaism, Christianity, and Islam are the three great monotheistic religions.Each has a universalistic core, mixed with particularistic loyalties and symbols.Each is capable of veering to one or the other side. The question is: Whatdetermines when the stress will be on the universalistic side, and when it willbe on community distinctiveness and the arbitrary aspects of its tradition?Building on the same cultural capital, one might regard the three as rivaluniversalizers of the Middle Eastern monotheism that emerged when the Hebrewcult of Yahweh temporarily unified the tribes of Palestine around 1000b.c.e. Christianity developed in the Hellenistic orbit at the time when the lasthopes of restoring an autonomous Jewish state (and state religion) were beingcrushed. Jesus, who died in the political crackdown on Jewish revolutionaries,is of the same generation as Philo, who reconciled Judaism with Platonicphilosophy through an allegorical reading of the Pentateuch—the core of theMosaic Old Testament, already translated into Greek by the Hellenizing factionwithin Judaism, the Sadducees. The growth of Christianity happened in thesame centuries as the rabbinical movement, which cast Judaism into whatbecame its standard form (Segal, 1986: 45–46, 52–54, 116–141). In the communitiescut off from the temple-oriented state cult at Jerusalem, religiousleadership was taken over by lay teachers, or rabbis. These developed a bodyof interpretations of scripture expanded for application to conditions of life inexile. This oral lore was organized into a vast literature, beginning with theMishnah around 200 c.e.Without political sovereignty or a cult center, Jewish religion emphasizedprivate piety and ethical standards. Early Christianity was a rival movementwithin the same social group—disenfranchised Jews of the Roman Empire.Both movements involved an interplay of universalism and particularism.The rabbinical movement elaborated purity rules, especially the kosher laws,which had the effect of separating out a particularistic community orientedaround food rituals. But monotheism and ethical emphasis encouraged a widemembership, and Judaism attracted many converts. It was in this communityof converts in the cities of the Roman Empire that Christianity grew. Evenafter this point Judaism continued to proselytize, until its Christian rivalsbecame hostile and the Christian emperors made conversion to Judaism a crime(Segal, 1986: 101–102, 177). After Christianity’s political triumph in theRoman Empire, the center of Judaism shifted to Babylon, where Jews were atolerated minority under the rule of the Zoroastrians of the Sassanid PersianEmpire. The first centuries of Islam continued this pluralistic religious tolerance.In Spain, the early Jewish population was persecuted by Christian rulers,especially the Visigothic successors to Roman rule. The Jews welcomed theIslamic conquerors of 711 as liberators, and for several centuries were closelyallied with the Muslim state (Pelaez del Rosal, 1985: 14–33). Eminent JewsTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 433were court advisers, sometimes viziers and military officials, active in diplomacyand warfare against the Christian states of the north.Two patterns are important among the philosophers of Spain. First, in theeast, Jewish philosophers were unoriginal, imitators of the prevailing schoolsin Islamic philosophy and theology; only in Spain did Jewish intellectualsbecome creative. The second point is that this was the time when Jews beganto move predominantly into the Christian world; by the end of the period (ca.1200), Jewish intellectuals had shifted over to living within Christendom, whilerelations with Islam had deteriorated into hostility. Jewish philosophical creativitytook place at the time of this uneasy reversal of religious alliances, andthis catalyzed philosophical creativity among the Spanish Muslims as well.Earlier Jewish philosophy in the east consisted of parallels or even branchesof Islamic thought. The Karaites produced a Jewish version of kalam; theRabbanites resembled the hadith scholars. In the 800s and early 900s, just atthe time when these Muslim schools were arguing over the canonical status oftheir own oral tradition, the Jewish academies came alive in a similar roundof argument. The Karaites rejected the oral tradition of the Talmud andMidrash interpretation, the province of the rabbinical scholars, to base themselvessolely upon scripture. What began as particularistic argument over textsbecame increasingly rationalistic. The Karaites attacked anthropomorphismand elaborated metaphysics. Saadia defended the Rabbanites with alternativemetaphysics and compiled proofs of God. Isaac Israeli, in the cosmopolitancircle of medical doctors, was a Neoplatonist drawing upon al-Kindi; hisnetwork contact and rival Saadia, who took over the Jewish academy at thecenter of action in Baghdad, adopted the arguments of the MuÀtazilites. Thefirst round of medieval Jewish philosophical creativity, as the attention spacesplit into three factions, represents a competitive appropriation of rival linesof philosophy established by the Muslims.Linguistically too the Jewish intellectuals merged themselves with the Muslimculture. Virtually all the Jewish intellectuals of this period wrote in Arabic,in philosophy as well as science and medicine.24 Saadia even translated theTalmudic Bible into Arabic. Saadia also produced a Hebrew grammar, parallelinganother Arab preoccupation; the difficult Arabic grammar had beenelaborated by Arabic grammarians and made a mark of elite culture. WhenHebrew grammars were written among the Jewish circle at Córdoba and thenearby Jewish academy at Lucena, they were written in Arabic. Hebrew poetry,which enjoyed a creative burst in Spain in the same circles as the grammarians(940–1020), was written by adaptation of Arabic metric forms. A key figurein this development was Dunash ben Labrat, a disciple of Saadia who migratedto Córdoba under patronage of a prominent Jewish official of the Muslimcourt. Arabic was the common spoken language of Spanish Jews.In Spain, in contrast to the Jewish communities of the east, the situation434 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsbegan to move along its own lines (see Figure 8.4). At first the Rabbanitesalone were active in Spain. The Jewish philosophers then split. There appearedmore extreme universalistic positions, Neoplatonist and others, which pushedtoward a religion of all intellectuals and cut loose from particularistic roots;and in reaction there were explicit defenses of Jewish tradition and a denial ofrationalistic philosophy. The first wave of these Jewish philosophers in Spainappeared in the same generation—around 1035–1065—as the first memorableFIGURE 8.4. ISLAMIC AND JEWISH PHILOSOPHERSIN SPAIN, 900–1065Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 435Muslim philosophers. Neoplatonism, aside from Isaac Israeli never prominentamong the Jews of the east, now came to the fore as a kind of trans-sectarianfaith. Ibn Gabirol set out a modified Neoplatonism in which every level ofemanation from the One consists of matter; matter is no longer taken as aprivation or evil at the bottom of the hierarchy (as in Plotinus), but is itselfthe one created substance underlying all levels of the world hierarchy, thespiritual and intelligible down through the lowest spatially extended corporeality.This spiritual matter gives the basis for occult influences and correspondencesthroughout the universe (Husik, 1969: 79). Ibn Gabirol’s Fountain ofLife contains no scriptural references, and the Latins were unable to tellwhether “Avicebrol” was Muslim, Christian, or Jew.About the same time, Bahya ibn Paquda produced a popular manual ofpiety reminiscent of the Sufis, downplaying ritual and scripture in favor of theattitudes of the heart; he mixed in kalamite theological arguments whileexpounding a Neoplatonic journey of the soul, aided by reason, toward unionwith the Divine Light. On the other flank from these universalists there wasIbn Hazm, an anti-metaphysical theologian and poet in Córdoba, who strucka new note in attacking not only the rationalistic theologians of Islam (bothMuÀtazilite and others) but also the Christians and Jews (Hodgson, 1974:2:31–32).In the generations after 1100 this polarization in Spain erupted with fullforce: at one extreme an ecumenical community of intellectuals cut loose fromparticularistic elements, and at the other end an upsurge of nationalist particularismon both Muslim and Jewish sides. These positions were themselvessubdivided: the universalistic intellectuals pursued various themes, which isto say they show the contending structures which are characteristic of allcreative life. Among the Jews, Ibn Zaddik at Córdoba expounded a Neoplatonicdoctrine of man as physical and spiritual microcosm of the world hierarchy,and combined this with kalamite proofs of the existence and unity ofGod, modified to preserve some traditional anthropomorphic features. Variousminor figures (Moses ibn Ezra, Abraham bar Hiyya) compiled and translatedan eclectic mixture of Neoplatonism, Aristotle, astronomy, astrology, andmathematics.In the same generation appeared Judah Halevi at Toledo and Córdoba,mounting a nationalistic attack on the philosophers and rational theologians.He was particularly concerned to refute the Rabbanite rivals, the Karaites, withtheir adoption of Muslim kalam, their rejection of the Talmudic traditions, andtheir allegorical interpretation of holy scripture. Halevi set out the superiorityof Judaism over philosophy, Christianity, and Islam alike; their endless disputesshow that reason can never settle anything. The only proof of God, Haleviasserts in Kuzari, is the special revelation made to the Jews in the Hebrew436 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathslanguage, which is accepted by both Christians and Muslims as the basis oftheir own religions (Sirat, 1985: 86–87, 97–131; Husik, 1969: 114–196).This split between the philosophical positions and this fideist critiquepredictably gave rise to an intermediate position. Ibn Daud, who migrated fromLucena to Toledo in the Almohad invasion, was a cosmopolitan with reservations(Pelaez de Rosal, 1985: 137). He aided Christian translators and wrotea history of Latin Christendom in Hebrew, as if in an explicit effort to open awider world for his coreligionists (EP, 1967: 4:267). At the same time, IbnDaud was concerned to reconcile philosophy and faith, and attacked IbnGabirol’s stance as heterodox to the Jewish faith and as bad philosophy (Husik,1969: 198). Responsive to the new situation of Jewish nationalism and therejection of the older cosmopolitan position, Ibn Daud promoted a purifiedversion of Aristotle against the Neoplatonists. Ibn Daud’s strategy of usingAristoteleanism to support a middle position combining both particularisticfaith and universalistic philosophy was the same one Moses Maimonideswould pursue at the end of the century, thereby making himself the dominantJewish philosopher of the Middle Ages. This was the stance that becameAverroism.The Cosmopolitan NetworkWe should visualize a single community of philosophers and scientists comprisingMuslims, Jews, and Christian translators, gradually coming together inSpain.These were the centuries of the Reconquista (see Figure 8.5). The Christianshad held the corner of Spain around Barcelona and the mountainous northernregions of Léon and Navarre since the 800s. After 1010, the caliphate ofCórdoba disintegrated into petty principalities, and these began to be eaten upby feudal Christian lords driving down from the north. The geopolitics ispatchy and episodic. Toledo, the major city in central Spain, was captured in1085. By 1120, the Christians were nibbling at the principality of Saragossain the east, near Barcelona. Around 1170, they had taken all of the northernhalf of Spain and were beginning to push into the Muslim heartlands of thesouth. There were two waves of counter-conquest on the Islamic side: theAlmoravids in the 1090s, who swept northward into the power vacuum fromMorocco and temporarily reestablished the caliphate; and again the Almohads,who did the same a generation later from the 1140s through the 1160s.The religious atmosphere across these decades alternated between fanaticismand tolerance. On the Muslim side, rulers wavered between militant orthodoxyand patronage of the cosmopolitan philosophers. The war policy instituted bythe fanatical Almohads who took Córdoba in 1149 was conversion or deathTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 437FIGURE 8.5. SPAIN, 1065–1235: THE HINGE OF THE HINGE438 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsto unbelievers. But only a few years before, the nationalistic Jewish philosopherJudah Halevi had been a court physician at Córdoba; and again in 1169 thecaliph himself, when Ibn Rushd was introduced by his companion and physicianIbn Tufayl, raised metaphysical questions and invited Ibn Rushd to producea definitive commentary on Aristotle. The pendulum could swing backjust as easily; Ibn Bajja was reputedly poisoned by his enemies at the Morrocancourt at Fez, and Ibn Rushd was exiled in 1195, then called back into favor.On the Christian side, the Crusader mentality of the warriors gave waysurprisingly easily to the movement within the church to learn from the Arabs.Toledo, recaptured in 1085, continued to have a largely Arab-speaking population,including a large community of Jews. The bishop of Toledo establishedhis school for translation around 1125–1150; among other things, it produceda Latin translation of the QurÁan. And in the period of political chaos, with“party kingdoms” on both sides, there were even occasional diplomatic alliancesbetween Christian and Muslim states against their local enemies (Pelaezde Rosal, 1985: 69–72). Jews frequently acted as diplomatic intermediaries.The Muslim intellectual community at first was much less cosmopolitan.In fact, the Malikite jurists who dominated in the Islamic west were hostile tokalam and Sufism, let alone falasifa and non-Muslims. For this very reason,the factional lineup was different than in the Muslim east. Both MuÀtazilitesand AshÀarite theologians of any significance are missing from the Spanishnetworks, and neither Sufi innovators nor rank-and-file Sufi movements northe ShiÀite sects have much prominence there. This leaves more room, underthe law of small numbers, for divergences within the remaining positions.Significant intellectual development began among the Spanish Muslims in thelate 900s in the religiously neutral topics of science, primarily in medicine andpharmacy, as well as astronomy and mathematics. The material base of thisdevelopment was created by the patronage of caliph ÀAbd-ar-Rahman III andhis successor al-Mansur, who built a great library at Córdoba around 960 ina bid to overshadow the prestige of the rival ÀAbbasid caliphate, now decliningin the east. Paralleling developments at the House of Wisdom in Baghdad twocenturies before, the accumulation of texts and work in science began first,before autonomous philosophical creativity would emerge five generationslater. It was at ÀAbd-ar-Rahman’s court that the great Jewish patron of intellectuals,the medical doctor Hasdai Ibn Shaprut, became an important official(Pelaez de Rosal, 1986: 62–76). The Jewish intellectuals were at the core ofthe Spanish world from the beginning.25With the fall of Toledo and the development of intellectual networks innorthern France during the early 1100s, Christian translators appeared inSpain looking for scientific texts of the Greeks, Arabs, and Jews alike. Nowwe find both Jewish and Muslim philosophers connected to the scientists; in-Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 439deed, virtually all the important philosophical names here were also scientiststo some degree. It was the activity of the scientific network which stimulatedbroader creativity as Muslim philosophy suddenly took off in Spain. JudahHalevi, Ibn Bajja, Ibn Tufayl, Ibn Rushd, Maimonides: all were medical doctors.Important scientific work in mathematics and astronomy was carried outby the Jewish philosophers Abraham bar Hiyya (41 in the key to Figure 8.5)at Barcelona in the early 1100s,26 and again in the next generation by AbrahamIbn Ezra of Toledo, whose Neoplatonism is permeated with astronomy andastrology. It is worth noting that Ibn Tufayl, Ibn Rushd, Ibn Daud, andMaimonides were all active astronomers as well as philosophers (DSB, 1981:4:504; 7:37–38; 12:1–2; 14:637; 15:33; Husik, 1969: 198). Ibn Rushd isdirectly connected to Ibn Zuhr (Avenzoar), a famous physician at Seville (46);and Ibn Tufayl was the master not only of Ibn Rushd but also of the outstandingastronomer al-Bitruji, the Latins’ Alpetragius (51), who developed analternative to Ptolemaic astronomy, dispensing with eccentrics and epicycles.The scientific stars emerged in Spain at the same time as the most notablephilosophers; another was the developer of spherical trigonometry, Jabir ibnAflah (47), Geber for the Latins, who was in Seville apparently with Ibn Tufayl,and whose astronomy was explicated by Maimonides.27 The cosmopolitancommunity was organized above all on the universalistic medium of naturalscience.The intermeshing of intellectual networks, within and across religions,became densest at just this time. Gundissalinus, a converted Jew, was apparentlyhelped in his Avicenna translations by Ibn Daud, another Jew in Toledo,a refugee from the networks at Córdoba and Lucena.28 Both Gundissalinusand Ibn Daud had some reputation among Christian philosophers in northernFrance. Halevi lived in Toledo around this time, and was in Córdoba inhis old age.29 Halevi, as court physician in Córdoba, must have been in thesame circles as Ibn Tufayl and Ibn Rushd, both court physicians in their ownright. Ibn Bajja, in the earlier generation, moved from the Muslim court atSaragossa30 to court circles at Seville, Granada, and Fez. There are Jewishphilosophers in these same places: Moses ibn Ezra (35) from Granada; Abrahamibn Ezra from Toledo, a world traveler in both Christian Europe and theMuslim Mediterranean, who connects not only with all the other Jewishphilosophers in Spain but also (directly or indirectly via his son) with Abu-l-Barakat in Baghdad (see Figure 8.3). Ibn Zaddik was the chief Jewish judge inCórdoba between 1138 and 1149; it is unlikely that he would not haveencountered court officials such as Ibn Tufayl and possibly the young IbnRushd.The most striking coincidence is that Ibn Rushd (1126–1198) and MosesMaimonides (1135–1204) grew up in Córdoba at virtually the same time, and440 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswent on to become the most important philosophers of their respective religions.It is unlikely, however, that they ever met. Maimonides left Córdoba withhis family in 1148, fleeing the Almohad conquest; he would have been 13 yearsold, Ibn Rushd 22. Nevertheless, the parallels between their intellectual trajectoriesare strong, and this is explicable by their common context. During thenext 17 years, Maimonides moved from place to place in Spain, ending witha short stay in Fez before moving to Egypt in 1165, where he eventually becamecourt physician. At a minimum he must have been in the network of the mosteminent teachers of medicine, which he would have had in common with IbnTufayl and Ibn Rushd—especially Ibn Zuhr (46) at Seville. It seems inconceivablethat in accumulating intellectual capital during his travels he would nothave been in the Jewish communities at Toledo, Seville, or Granada—andthereby in the cosmopolitan networks of those places as well.31 As the Muslimcenters came under increasing political pressure from reactionary regimes, theJewish centers became ever more important for cosmopolitans of all faiths.They become the nodes where the several chains cross, the structural key tocreativity.The Religion of ReasonAs Jewish philosophy reached its peak after 1100, Muslim philosophy in Spainsimultaneously burst into high creativity. There is an intergenerational chainof important philosophers: Ibn Bajja at Saragossa, Seville, and Granada; hisadmirer Ibn Tufayl at Seville, Córdoba, and Fez; and in turn his protégé IbnRushd at Córdoba, Fez, and Seville, who became famous as the great Averroës.All of them were concerned with the reconciliation of philosophy and faith,which for them was also a political problem owing to the intermittent dangersof persecution from the Malikite literalist jurists so often dominant in theMuslim states. In this respect the Jews had more freedom, since they lackedstate power and hence the means of coercing the non-orthodox; the Jews(especially Ibn Gabirol and Ibn Zaddiq) appear to have led the way towarduniversalization. Ibn Bajja, Ibn Tufayl, and Ibn Rushd were, moreover, stateofficials—viziers, judges, or court physicians—and were intimately aware ofthe vagaries of power.Ibn Tufayl’s philosophical novel sets out their typical strategy. In a settingforeshadowing Robinson Crusoe (and which might have inspired Defoe,through a Latin translation in 1671; see Windelband, [1892] 1901: 317), IbnTufayl depicts a boy growing up in solitude on an uninhabited island, who bysheer reason arrives at a philosophical conception of the universe. This consistslargely of the Neoplatonic hierarchy: the Forms of things, the soul, the worldspirit, finally culminating in an ecstatic vision of God beyond words and con-Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 441cepts. Later he meets a Muslim from an inhabited island, and they discoverthat the truths of faith and of reason are the same. But—and this is characteristicof the political consciousness of the Spanish philosophers—when thetwo friends travel to the inhabited island and try to explain their discovery,they are attacked by the literalist theologians. Sadly the young man withdrawsagain into solitude, having learned that his truth is only for the enlightened,and not for the superstitious masses.This position was shared by Ibn Bajja, Ibn Rushd, and Jewish contemporariessuch as Ibn Zaddiq and to some degree Ibn Daud and even Maimonides;later it would become the hallmark of the Averroists of the Christian andJewish world. Their doctrine is an insider’s position: truth has a double aspect,crude and literal for ordinary believers, which can be reinterpreted at a higherlevel, in keeping with the philosophy of the elite. The elitism is reinforced bythe doctrine that salvation happens only through the intellect. Bar Hiyyah haddistinguished classes of souls up through the wise and just who are reabsorbedinto pure Form; Ibn Zaddiq held that science is a necessary part of theworship of God, and that only philosophers reach the perfection of the prophets(Sirat, 1985: 86–87, 98).32 In Ibn Rushd’s version, heaven and hell arecrude allegories, and there is no material resurrection of the body; the onlyimmortal part of the human individual is the intellectual soul, and indeed onlythat part of it which is filled with universal truths from the transcendent worldsoul, the Active Intellect (similarly Maimonides’ Guide 3.51, 54; see Maimonides,1956). Ibn Rushd was above all a fanatical admirer of Aristoteleanlogic: since salvation is achieved through the intellect, without knowing logicone cannot even be saved. This means that crude literalists have no realreligious status; their religion as they take it is a delusion and brings themnothing. Ibn Rushd, however, somewhat cynically declares that ordinary peopleshould be required to adhere to the literal religion for the good of the state;heretics should be given no voice, but must be executed (Fakhry, 1983: 277–283; de Boer, 1903: 189).So far this stance of an insiders’ and outsiders’ truth could be compatiblewith several different philosophies; Neoplatonism or Neo-Pythagoreanismwould work just as well as a secret doctrine as Aristoteleanism. Ibn Bajja andIbn Tufayl were still Neoplatonists; so were the Spanish Jews such as IbnGabirol, Ibn Zaddik, Abraham ibn Ezra, and many minor figures. How doesit happen that Ibn Daud, Ibn Rushd, and Maimonides deliberately broke withNeoplatonism and brought about the rediscovery of Aristotle?Creativity at the Point of Political BreakdownWhy is it that the generations of the mid- and late 1100s had such fatefulintellectual impact? One important reason is that, whereas earlier Neoplaton-442 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsism was the acceptable cosmopolitan position, defended by declaring that thereligious masses could never understand it, these militant Aristoteleans nowalso tried to take over some of the territory of the scriptural faith. In both theJewish and Muslim camps there had been an upsurge of religious nationalismagainst the older philosophical rationalisms. The philosophical innovators nowcarved out a new position between the older camps, claiming to incorporatethe best of both. Ibn Tufayl, rather typical of the cosmopolitans, was alsoecumenical about religion. His ideal religious practice incorporates vegetarianism,cleanliness, asceticism, and a respect for plants and animals, seeminglytaking over items from Persian and Hindu religion (de Boer, 1903: 186). IbnDaud and Maimonides, in contrast, want to defend the specific truths of theJewish scriptures, and Ibn Rushd does the same for the QurÁan.Ibn Rushd proceeded by working on theology as well as on philosophy. Hedefined the core theological beliefs33 in such a way that his rational philosophywould coincide with them. This was the same strategy pursued by the Jewishphilosophers closest to Aristotle. Ibn Daud, a generation earlier than both IbnRushd and Maimonides, inaugurated the strategy, for instance, reading thecategories of Aristotle into Bible passages such as the Psalm 139th, or interpretingangels as secondary causes between God and the lower material spheres(Husik, 1969: 198, 205, 221, 239). Ibn Daud’s main book was published in1161, Ibn Rushd began his Aristotle commentary in 1169, and 1180 he usedthe method of harmonizing religion with philosophy by finding the latter inthe QurÁan. Maimonides first acquired his reputation, perhaps before leavingSpain (DSB, 1981: 9:28), by his masterly commentary on the rambling rabbinicalliterature constituting the Mishnah; and he wrote a rabbinical codewhich culled from this huge mass of precedents the items of faith as 13 innumber. Since medieval Judaism had no central authority or monopolisticecclesiastical organization, Maimonides owes his eminence to having provideda famous, if controversial, systematization of the central items of faith. Thisin turn gave him a base which he could harmonize with abstract philosophy.This was the task of his later life, his Guide for the Perplexed, appearing in1190.Maimonides and Ibn Rushd are like most dominant intellectual figures inthat they stand out for the scope and depth of their work.They are energystars, filled with ambition to take on major tasks and the cultural capital andemotional force to carry them through. Although following the path pioneeredby Ibn Daud, Maimonides overshadows him by the depth of his scripturalstudies and his philosophical thoroughness. Maimonides systematically expoundsand refutes rival viewpoints, and he sets out his own arguments withan abundance of proofs, along with scriptural references and etymologicalinterpretations to overcome literalism. Ibn Rushd has a similar fund of emotionalenergy. He puts it into his massive commentaries on the whole corpusTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 443of Aristotle, into an attack on the Muslim Neoplatonists from al-Farabi andIbn Sina right down to Ibn Bajja (exempting only his own patron, Ibn Tufayl),and into a counterattack against al-Ghazali’s attempt to destroy philosophy.Ibn Rushd is no mere transmitter of Aristotle, he elaborates Aristotle intohis own system. He depicts Aristotle’s world as eternally in a process ofbecoming: Forms are not so much classifications or levels of reality as thedynamic side of matter, moving everything in the world from potentiality toactuality and back again endlessly. Since Ibn Rushd is also committed tomaking this a religious vision, he cannot avoid certain aspects of Neoplatonism,such as the hierarchy of Forms on up to the divine eternal Mover. But hisemphasis is as far as possible from the Neoplatonic stress on a transcendentalflow upward, still less an emanation of reality downward. Everything on everylevel is eternal, and the whole makes up a vast interacting system. There iseven an eternal place in it for the Philosopher, who perceives the reality of allthe levels and thus participates in a special kind of intellectual Eternity.Ibn Rushd and Maimonides represent different branches of this culminationof Spanish philosophy. In Maimonides we find much more a compromiseof evenhanded reasoning with scriptural particularism; he is willing to givereason its due, demonstrate its limits, and show how it can peacefully coexistwith dogma. Maimonides directs his criticisms largely against the MuÀtaziliteatomists, by now the traditional school within Jewish rational theology (representedby Saadia and by the Karaites, the same enemy Halevi a generationback had singled out for attack). Ibn Daud is more concerned to attack IbnGabirol’s version of Neoplatonism (which was popular among current Jewishthinkers such as Moses ibn Ezra and Ibn Zaddik); he declares Gabirol full ofbad arguments, as well as contrary to Jewish faith.34 Ibn Rushd is an extremistof philosophical reason capable of producing a complete religion in itself, withwhich scriptural religion must coincide. Ibn Rushd is much more the purephilosopher. He takes to its extreme the structural opportunities of the intellectualfield: not only to reject kalam but also to overthrow Neoplatonism asthe reigning religion of reason and replace it with his vision of Aristoteleanism.His stance becomes clearer when we consider his rejoinder to al-Ghazali,who had turned the weapons of philosophy against itself in favor of Sufimysticism. Ibn Rushd’s counterattack declares that al-Ghazali did no more thandestroy the Neoplatonism of al-Farabi and Ibn Sina, not the purer philosophyof Aristotle. Ibn Rushd even offers an alliance to the most conservative jurists,for he declares that the rational theologians occupy a ridiculous and evensubversive position, and their attempt to use philosophy to interpret the scripturesonly confuses the masses without enlightening anyone to the true philosophy.Ibn Rushd makes a bold effort to overturn the whole Islamic intellectualfield; he would drive out all the rationalized positions except his own, andleave the rest to the dogmatists.444 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsSuch ambitions are always overreaching, but Ibn Rushd’s nevertheless hada certain basis in contemporary realities. The cosmopolitan world of theIslamic Neoplatonists was indeed collapsing, and the rational theologians hadhad their day; Ibn Rushd himself was virtually the last significant constructiveMuslim philosopher. And yet there was a basis for his vast emotional energy,a region in which he could tacitly feel the prospects of success. This was notto be in the Muslim world, where Ibn Rushd had no disciples, and whereindeed the originals of most of his texts were lost.35 It was the cosmopolitancommunity of Spain that made possible his philosophy. It is not Ibn Rushdwho is known as a great philosopher but Averroës. He could not, of course,have known that his works would be translated into Latin 30 years after hisdeath and produce a shock wave in Christendom a generation after that.Perhaps he was aware that he was being read by the Jews in the late 1100s,and was admired by Maimonides and his circle (Fakhry, 1983: 274–275).36Among Jewish philosophers he was even more influential than Maimonides;whereas Maimonides was most famous among the ordinary Jewish religiouspublic, the intellectuals tended to use Averroës as a vantage point from whichto understand The Guide for the Perplexed (EP, 1967: 4:269).The structural field which produced Ibn Rushd’s creative energy and transformedhim into the renowned Averroës was an unusually wide one. The fieldof forces which centered on Toledo at the time of the translators, with tentaclesas far north as Chartres and Paris, charged up a current whose outcomes wereAverroës’s vision and the reemergence of Aristotle beside the long-dominantphilosophical Neoplatonism.37After Ibn Rushd’s death in 1198 and the departure of Maimonides, Spanishintellectual life rapidly fell apart. The Christians came down through the passesto defeat the Moorish army on the southern plain at Los Navos de Tolosa in1212. By 1236 Córdoba had fallen, followed by Seville in 1248. The Muslimssurvived until 1492 cooped up in the mountain enclave of Granada. Therewere no more networks of Muslim philosophers or scientists in Spain, nor inthe states surviving in the Maghrib. It is emblematic that the young Ibn ÀArabiattended Ibn Rushd’s funeral before departing for the east; already this lastrepresentative of the Spanish intellectual lineage was abandoning rationalphilosophy in favor of a theosophical reconciliation with revealed religion.The Jews too were leaving, this time disappearing from the Islamic intellectualworld for good. Maimonides’s translators and disciples, especially theseveral generations of the Tibbon family (49 and 56 in Figure 8.5, 12, 15, and24 in Figure 9.5), had moved north into southern France. The Jewish communitynow saw battles between Maimonidists (who were often also Averroists)against rabbinical traditionalists, and more generally a split between universalisticphilosophy and nationalist particularism. The most famous philosopherto emerge from this orbit was Levi ben Gerson, in contact with the papal courtTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 445at Avignon, who is now known primarily in the world of Latin scholasticism(hence his fame as Gersonides), following up the problems raised by Averroësas well as in astronomy. Against this tendency there was a nationalist reactionrepresented by Hasdai Crescas and Joseph Albo, living in now-Christian Spainin the late 1300s and early 1400s. Here too emerged the Jewish Kabbalah,propagated especially by Abraham Abulafia (in the old Neo-Pythagorean center,Saragossa) and Moses de Léon, as a kind of secret code for the Jewish faithunder the growing persecution in Christian Spain. The Jews, who centuriesbefore had welcomed Islamic rule as more favorable than Christian hostility,left the lands of Islam again in the late 1100s as Muslim religious tolerancedisappeared. For better or worse, Islamic-Jewish intellectual interaction was athing of the past.38Averroës and Maimonides, in their respective communities, are among theclearest examples of the owl of Minerva flying at dusk. For the Jews, theAlmohad invasion sent most intellectuals fleeing Muslim Spain for Christendom;Maimonides fled east to the court of another caliph, but his followerswere all in Christian Europe. Could he have known that after his time therewould be no more Jewish philosophers in Islam? Did Ibn Rushd know that hewas the last of his breed, and that the cosmopolitan intellectual communitywas disappearing in the east as well as in Spain? Could he have known that14 years after his death the Muslim power in Andalusia would be crushed?Geopolitical events are rooted in shifting resources and alliances, and no doubtcast their shadows before them; by the mid-1100s, Spanish intellectuals musthave felt the ground slipping underneath. It is such shifts in the underpinningsof intellectual communities that set the opportunity to rearrange the contentsof the intellectual field, which we know as these episodes of creativity.Coda: Are Idea Imports a Substitute for Creativity?Translating philosophical texts from a foreign culture inhibits creative philosophyamong the receivers. When the eminent figures in the philosophical communityare the translators or expositors of alien philosophies, their importedcapital becomes a substitute for creating their own. This does not violate thestructural principles of the intellectual field but follows from them. Under thelaw of small numbers, there is room for three to six positions to commandpublic attention; it does not matter whether these are filled up by new creationsor come from abroad. Presenting a foreign philosophy can preempt one ofthese slots. Where there is little competition from others, the chief idea importersbecome energy stars, pseudo-creators in their own right.Consider the reputation of Cicero, in the generation when Greek philosophymade its first impact on the Roman intellectual world. Not himself a446 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathstranslator of texts (that was a low-status activity of slaves), he was patron ofthe slave-curators and editors of Greek manuscripts, and reaped the fame ofthe Greek philosophers by expounding several of them with literary polish forhis Roman audience. Varro did much the same for Greek science. Lucretiuswas the competitive counterweight to Cicero in his generation, giving literaryexpression to Epicurean philosophy, the one major Greek position Cicero didnot appropriate. Rounding out the range of oppositions of the Roman intellectualcommunity were their first Stoics. There were no indigenous creators,as the entire field was divided up among the idea importers.We see similar negative effects on indigenous creativity in each case whereimports dominate the attention space. In China during the early centuries ofthe Buddhist period, local schools of thought were merely imports of Indianschools. Similarly, for the first half-dozen generations in Japan, the notablenames were merely those who imported one of the Buddhist schools fromChina. In Muslim Spain it was not a question of translating texts from a foreignlanguage, but nevertheless texts had to be imported from the east; there wasa lag of three generations between the founding of the Córdoba library,providing a material base for intellectual life, and the emergence of creativephilosophers. In Carolingian Europe, virtually all the well-known scholarswere textual importers, from the founder of the Jarrow monastery in England,who journeyed repeatedly to Rome for books, through Bede and the Yorkscholars, to Alcuin, who transplanted this learning to the Continent at theCarolingian court (Gilson, 1944: 187–227). The usual lineage of masters andpupils dominated intellectual life, only in this case their ideas were importedrather than created. Innovation finally broke out in the fifth generation, whenAlcuin’s followers split into rival centers. The most notable name is John ScotusEriugena, though he is known mainly for reworking the philosophy of pseudo-Dionysus, which he had translated from the Greek; Eriugena’s reputation is,so to speak, another pseudo-reputation. In high medieval Christendom thegenerations of most intense importing from the Arab world form a trough inindigenous philosophy, the break in the networks in the late 1100s and early1200s that we see in Figures 9.3 and 9.4. There is another trough at the endof the period, during the breakdown of the medieval university base, when theHumanists again focused attention on ancient texts.These are cases of imports swamping the entire attention space. A phenomenonpeculiar to these periods is that the biggest stars are typically eclectics,importing several mutually incompatible philosophies. In early BuddhistChina the famous figure is the translator Kumarajiva, who has a centralposition in the vertical and horizontal networks and oppositions just like anyother notable creator, although his own work is unoriginal. Kumarajiva is likeCicero in that he imported not just one but two main factions of alienTensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 447philosophy—both Madhyamika negative dialectics and Sautrantika phenomenalism—even though Nagarjuna formulated the Madhyamika doctrine inopposition to the Sautrantikas and other Hinayana schools. Seven generationslater Hsüan-tsang traveled to India and brought back texts which madehim one of the most famous figures in the history of Chinese philosophy. Hetoo sponsored two incompatible Indian schools, Yogacara idealism and Abhidharmarealism. Boethius became the last memorable Roman philosopherthrough his eclecticism, attempting to translate all of Plato and Aristotle intoLatin in the early 500s, when knowledge of Greek was being lost underbarbarian rule, and also incorporating Stoicism into his Consolation of Philosophy(DSB, 1981: 1:228–229). Ibn Massara (1 in Figure 8.4), the firstimporter of philosophy into Muslim Spain, brought in MuÀtazilite, Sufi, Neoplatonist,and Neo-Pythagorean schools alike. Among the Christians at theToledo translation school, the most eminent figure (ranked as a secondaryphilosopher in Figure 9.3) is Dominic Gundissalinus (Gonzalez), a convertedJew, who translated Avicenna (Ibn Sina) and Avicebrol (Ibn Gabirol), the mostimportant Muslim and Jewish philosophers to date, then wrote his own treatisesbased on both (Knowles, 1962: 204). Once again we see the eclectic stanceof a translators who makes a double-barreled impact, expounding two rivalpositions. It is a sign that the contents are not taken as seriously as the prestigeof importing per se.In some cases dependence on imports is brief, or imports do not swampthe field at all but only become one faction among others engaged in indigenouscreation. In the Islamic world the first three generations of Greek translatorswere themselves uncreative, but they never took over the attention space; asfalsafa became established, it became one faction entering into alliances andoppositions with the ongoing arguments of the Muslim schools. In T’angChina, Hsüan-tsang was unoriginal, but his translation bureau enriched thecontending networks and gave rise, through a former assistant, Fa-tsang, toone of the great intellectual innovations in China, the Hua-yen totalist philosophy.By this time the Chinese Buddhist schools had institutionalized their ownlines of argument; the continuing rounds of imports added pressures to reorganizethe attention space, resulting in simultaneous innovations, including theCh’an revolution taking place in the meditation school. In Japan the first roundof imports from China were sterile, but the second round, from the late 1100sthrough 1300, coincided with indigenous outbreaks of Buddhist innovation,starting with the Pure Land movements; the Japanese Zen schools which tookoff at this time had Chinese links but diverged in their own pathways. And inmedieval Christendom, the striking thing is that dependence on translationsand imports was relatively short-lived; indeed, translation was a continuousinterest from the early 1100s through the early 1300s, but indigenous factional448 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathslineages kept up their own creative arguments during most of this time. Theimpact of translation on creativity depends more on the structure of thesurrounding factions than on the carriers of foreign ideas themselves, who tendto be traditionalists within their own camps. Idea imports stimulate innovationonly to the extent that indigenous factions have strong enough bases and theenergies of ongoing disputes, so that the imports enter into a conflictualrealignment of the attention space.If importing ideas stifles creativity, in the reciprocal part of the worldnetwork exporting ideas can have stimulating effects. In the case of MuslimSpain in the mid-1100s, contact with a network of Christian importers atToledo fostered the upsurge of cosmopolitan philosophy among the Jews whobridged the Arab side, stimulating Averroës and Maimonides to break freefrom dominant Neoplatonism and formulate an aggressive Aristoteleanism.The stimulating effects of exporting to an eager audience are seen moststrikingly in places where intellectual life was flat before exports began. Thepattern is found in the Renaissance, not on the side of the Italian importersbut among the Byzantines. Gemistus Pletho was the leading actor (261 inFigure 9.6), a cosmopolitan diplomat in both Turkey and Italy in the 1430s,and an inspirer of the Medici circle at Florence which fostered Ficino and Pico.In the early 1400s he broke with Christian Neoplatonism and reintroducedelements of paganism, indeed reviving the old Platonist religion. It was hisposition which was so influential in Italy, and which Ficino followed; otherneo-pagans of this network, such as Bessarion, included even a cardinal of thechurch. A receptive market on the importing side makes bolder the exporters,even as it makes the importers more dependent.Pletho’s position is equivalent to the religion of reason which emergedamong the Muslim cosmopolites in Spain of the late 1100s. There are parallelstoo in the surrounding circumstances: the disintegration of the Córdoba caliphate,heading toward its climax in the years after Averroës’s death; and thefinal decline of the Byzantine Empire, reduced by Ottoman conquests in the1300s to a tiny survival, which was finally extirpated in 1453. The episode isconventionally explained as a contingent event, the fortuitous flow of Byzantineexiles to the west, which brought in “new” Greek texts and helped set off theRenaissance. But in fact Byzantine philosophy became creative only in the veryprocess of migration, and previously had been stagnant for many centuries.39The geopolitical crisis in the background was important only because, as inSpain, it introduced cosmopolitan connections and rearranged the networks.A third case is post-Meiji Japan. When the European university system wasintroduced, the period of dependence on Western intellectual imports wasremarkably brief, only one generation. Buddhist philosophy, long since stagnant,suddenly revived, and captured the new institutional base through an in-Tensions of Ideas: Islam, Judaism, Christendom • 449novative philosophical network centered on Kyoto University. What had happenedwas that Japanese Buddhist sojourners in the West had discovered thatthey had something to offer European and American sophisticates. The leaderof the Kyoto school, Nishida, was a childhood friend of the most popular Zenexporter, D. T. Suzuki. In the particulars of these histories we can see anothervariant on the central pattern of intellectual life. In all these cases the exportersbecame creative because they were actively drawn into a new network, in thiscase a long-distance one, full of migrations and upheavals on the exportingside as much as or more than among the receptors. The bases of intellectualproductivity were rearranged, opening the possibility of new alliances andconflicts within the networks. A foreign audience can help build up an attentionspace as much as a domestic one, above all when the most important networkson both sides come into contact face to face. Then the intensified interactionrituals of intellectual life occur which raise emotional energy for new combinationsin the realm of symbols. Who best reaps the excitement of these periodsdepends on whose indigenous networks are already most familiar with theingredients; for the newcomers, the excitement of introducing old ideas blotsout the fact that, outside of their local attention space, the ideas are notoriginal.40