CHAPTER 9£Academic Expansion as a Two-Edged Sword:Medieval ChristendomMedieval Christian philosophy builds on the same ingredients as Muslimphilosophy: the politicized, socially activist monotheism of Judaism, togetherwith imports of sophisticated abstractions accumulated across many generationsin the intellectual community of the Greeks. The intellectual fields ofChristendom and of Islam go through much the same structural conflicts. Theimportant differences between medieval Islam and Christianity are quantitative,not qualitative, matters of weight and timing rather than intellectualsubstance. Islam and Christianity do not exemplify the divergence of East andWest; both are equally West, as we can see by comparing the truly divergentintellectual orbit demarcated on the east by Buddhism and Brahmanism. Thelong-term trajectory of Islam is, so to speak, the bad dream of the West; it iswhat Christendom would look like in recent centuries if theological conservativeshad become entrenched, along with a routinized scholasticism challengedonly by poetic mystics.Consider the factional history of Islamic intellectual life across its first 18or 20 generations. As the spaces of the intellectual field are first filled in (theperiod 800–900 in Figure 8.1), there emerge four main factions: (1) rationaltheology, kalam; (2) scriptural traditionalists, hadith, the special province oflawyers; (3) importers of Greek (and to some extent Hindu and Babylonian)science, logic, and philosophy; and (4) Sufis: ascetic religious virtuosi at first,later developing an anti-ritualistic mysticism (see Figure 9.1).Then comes a round of realignments and consolidations: The AshÀaritescompromise between kalam and hadith (1  2). The ShiÀite faction of politicaltheology develops its own doctrine, the hidden Imam (this might be considered1a, a rival version of rational theology); and this amalgamates in turn with theimported science and Neoplatonist–Neo-Pythagorean hierarchical cosmologyin the doctrine of the Brethren of Purity (1a  3). The philosophical high pointcomes with further amalgamations in the next generations: Ibn Sina combinesthe now-declining tradition of kalam with the Neoplatonism and logic of Greek451philosophy (1  3). This falsafa is attacked by al-Ghazali, who combines theAshÀarite lineage of conservative kalam with Sufism on the one hand, whileextracting from the Greek imports the tool of formal logic on the other (callthis 3a).Al-Ghazali’s grand coalition ([1  2],  [3a  4]) now becomes the orthodoxculture of Islam. Falsafa (except for scholastic logic, i.e., 3  3a) disappears.The remaining rivals are largely branches of Sufism (4): on the one handthe illuminationist hierarchical theology represented by Suhrawardi on theheterodox side, and by Ibn ÀArabi among the Sunnis, a combination of Sufimysticism with the politicized emanationism of the Pure Brethren (4  1a 3); on the other hand a poetic mysticism which holds itself aloof from intellectualalliances. After 1200 the prestige of Sufism is so high that its followerscan go their own way while virtually all other intellectual factions try tomake coalition with it. The one exception comprises the surviving hadithlegalists, such as Ibn Taimiyah and the Malikite judge Ibn Khaldun, whoproduce isolated outbursts of philosophical criticism against the now-predominantmysticism-cum-logic of the madrasas.FIGURE 9.1. ISLAMIC FACTIONS AND COMBINATIONS452 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsWe may trace the same development at the level of the material institutionsof intellectual life. Originally kalam theologians and the hadith lawyers representsplits within the same base: they are all teachers at the mosques, wherenew factions can form when a leader withdraws from a circle with his followersto another pillar. The Sufis are distinctive at first because they base themselvesnot in the mosque but outside: they are street preachers or religious exemplars;later when their orders devoted to tariqah, the way of mystical life, becomeroutinized (in the Weberian sense), they acquire their own specialized meetinghouses.The imports of philosophy and science are treated as secular, whichmeans that they are never allowed into the mosque; they depend on patronageof the courts and the wealthy, and on secular careers of doctors and astronomersor astrologers.The height of the battles between kalam and hadith takes place between900 and 1100 over what kinds of teachings are to be allowed in the mosques.This conflict is resolved toward the latter date with the founding of madrasas,specialized schools with their own buildings and endowments. Al-Ghazali, whoappears in the founding generation of the madrasas (and at the most famousmadrasa of the capital), puts together the orthodoxy which becomes thecurriculum of these schools. In other words, Sufism eventually is brought intothe intellectual coalition in the madrasas, although it keeps expanding itsindependent external bases too. Philosophy, however, is excluded; its declinemust be largely due to the fact that it can no longer compete for intellectualattention, based on scattered and episodic lay supports, once an organizedschool system exists. Only logic, split off from philosophy, is allowed into themadrasas’ curriculum; but on its own it survives only as a stagnant scholasticism.Again I have left the Spanish episode of 935–1200 to one side, encapsulatedas it was from the history of Islamic life in eastern Islam. Here the structuresare more like the early period in the east: madrasas do not exist; the Sufi ordersare weak; hadith is dominated by the most conservative school, the Malikites,and rational theology (whether MuÀtazilite or AshÀarite) has no importantrepresentatives. Instead the cosmopolitan community is especially strong. TheJews are in close contact with both Muslim and Christian intellectuals, andall share a cosmopolitan interest in science. Among the Jews, the Neoplatonismof the Greek philosophical importers becomes expanded into a universalisticreligion of reason, and this acquires followers among the Muslims aswell; this is a synthesis of (1) rational theology in its Jewish branch and (3)Greek imports. Jewish scriptural conservatives—the rabbinical equivalent of(2) hadith—respond by a nationalist attack on cosmopolitanism. This sets thestage for a sophisticated compromise by Ibn Daud and above all Maimonides,who repudiate the Neoplatonic religion of reason and elevate instead a purifiedAristoteleanism which they harmonize with religion. Averroës on the MuslimAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 453side follows the same path: combining the cosmopolitanism of the scientificnetworks with the conservatism of his lineage of Malikite jurists, he tooexcludes traditional kalam and replaces philosophical Neoplatonism with anew cosmopolitanism of Aristotle. Structurally, one might say that in Spainthe cosmopolitan Greek import sector (3) has the field so much to itself thatit splits into factions that never existed in the more beleaguered intellectualspace to the east.Compare now the factional skeleton of Christendom. The initial ingredientsare the same as in Islam: (1) rational theology, (2) pious scripturalists, (3) Greekimports, and (4) mystics of direct religious experience. Many of the sametendencies and conflicts are acted out. The Sufi virtuosi, prostrating themselvesat every step on the pilgrimage to Mecca or sitting on their rooftops for hoursstaring at the sun, have their exact counterpart among Christian ultra-ritualistsand ascetics. Saint Peter Damiani, who called pagan philosophy the work ofthe devil, and Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, who attacked Abelard and the otherrationalists in the name of faith and spiritual discipline, are structurally similarto the Hanbalite theologians who incited mobs to attack the kalamites in thestreets of Baghdad and Damascus. Ibn Sina piles up arguments and distinctionsin a fashion foreshadowing Christian scholasticism at its most assiduous, andthe madrasas exhibit the disputations and the routinized curricula that wouldcharacterize the universities.What differs is not the conflicts but their long-term outcomes. Controversiesof heresy and church councils condemning philosophers’ doctrines becomealmost a routine part of Christian intellectual life. But although texts areburned and doctrines prohibited, the overall pattern does not give any specialweight to the conservative scripturalists. The standpoint from which heresy isjudged slips further and further into the terrain of technical philosophy for sixor eight generations. It is as if Christendom were full of Ibn Sinas and al-Ghazalis repeatedly pushed to make use of the conceptual weapons of theiropponents, each time driving the controversy to a new level of sophistication.If the outcomes are different, it is because the factional alliances take adifferent pattern. Within Christendom, (1) kalam, or rational theology, and (3)Greek imports are not initially split, institutionally and intellectually. Indeed,they begin as the same faction. The combination had already been made bythe Patristic writers of the 300s c.e., especially Saint Augustine, whose workswere taken as the major source of theological orthodoxy. Islamic kalam, bycontrast, had its own institutional base (the mosques) and several generationsof building its own networks and ideas before Greek falsafa was imported instrength; and the imports were admitted only fractionally into its base. To besure, in later Christendom too the successive waves of Greek imports tendedto come loose from the existing theological orthodoxy, and to some extent they454 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathswere supported by secular intellectual bases in the aristocratic courts, outsidethe institutions of the church; but this separation was never as extreme as inIslam. It is above all with the Humanists of the Renaissance that this institutionalsplit approached that found in Islam. This constitutes a striking differencein chronology: the Muslims experience the separation of secularist importsversus orthodox theological philosophy early in the life of their networks,whereas Christendom experiences it late.The other major difference in factional alignments is that the Christianversion of (2) hadith—scriptural loyalists—has a different kind of structuralbase than in Islam. The hadith specialists are teachers and practitioners of law;the legal world is the most scripturally traditionalist part of the Muslimeducated classes. In Christendom, by contrast, law and scriptural traditionalismare split very early. The strength of the law schools is found in differentplaces from the institutional strongholds of theology (northern Italy versusnorthern France and England); the lawyers are even more connected to secular,pre-Christian traditions (in this case Roman rather than Greek). So there arisesa faction not prominent in Islam, which might be called rational law. Hereafterthe scholastic tools and methods of the law schools become some of theingredients that penetrate the practice of Christian rational theology andphilosophy. Lacking a tie with law, scriptural traditionalists in Christendomhave a much weaker base than in Islam, and are much less able to control theterms of the struggle with other intellectual factions.If Islam and Christendom diverge intellectually, it is not so much becauseof different ingredients as by divergent outcomes of their conflicts. Moving therelative point of balance within the same kind of structure brings about quitedifferent long-term products. We look first at the external conditions of intellectuallife that channeled the European network on its path.The Organizational Bases of Christian ThoughtThe crucial institutions of medieval Christendom are three: the monasteries,the papacy, and the universities.Northern Europe began as a thinly populated frontier, in which civilizedsettlement was introduced largely by rural monasteries.1 The church developedin alliance with the local aristocracy; monks were recruited among their sonsand relatives, endowed with buildings, landed property, and serfs to work it.Monasteries were devoted to ritual in honor of their founders, masses for theirsins and their memory, providing emotional mobilization and cultural legitimationas the military rulers set themselves apart from the ruled. Around1050–1100 there began a second wave of monastic expansion and reform. Theoriginal Benedictine monasteries began to decline in numbers of monks and inAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 455revenues; their scattered properties were becoming inadequate to support thelifestyle of grand consumption and ceremony as a market economy began tocompete with their fixed sources of income. The new wave of monasteries wasmore ascetic and economically rationalized than the first.The Augustinian canons arose in towns, where they lived on donations oftithes and small rental properties; their base of support had shifted to the minorgentry and the middle class, which now had enough property to invest inreligious status on a modest scale. The Cistercians continued to recruit fromthe aristocracy, but now they militantly pursued organizational independence.They were rigidly ascetic. Illicit marriages were cut off, emphasizing the separationof their order from the family ties which had previously been theirprincipal support. They abjured ostentatious ritual and refused to carry outfunerals and masses for the laity. Instead, as a source of income they tookdonations of property without strings attached; to work their land they recruiteda subordinate rank of lay brothers as religious serfs, who were rewardedfor their discipline by a minor share in the status of religious life. Likea number of other new orders, the Cistercians were involved in militaryCrusades, but above all they expanded the agricultural cultivation of Europeinto the frontiers (Spain, Scotland, eastern Europe) and onto wastelands andmountains. Their emphasis on action rather than ritual made them economicallyproductive, while their asceticism prevented them from investing in consumptionand display and motivated them to plow back their gains into furtherexpansion. The Cistercians are a case of the Weberian Protestant ethic inCatholic and corporate guise. Their monasteries became large landowners,buying up intervening parcels and consolidating properties. Their rationalizedagriculture spilled over into wool production, mining, mills, and ironworks.The Cistercians were the most spectacular organizational expansion of theperiod (see Figure 9.2), but monastic growth was shared by other new orders.Taking advantage of a new market economy, they become a major impetus ineconomic expansion (Gimpel, 1976).The papacy expanded organizationally on the growth of the monasteries.In the early Middle Ages, the church was part of the feudal dispersion of power.Bishops acted as territorial princes, and were closely entwined with the politicsof local aristocracies (Morrison, 1969: 266, 354, 387–388). The papacy’s mainpower was as local ruler in central Italy; its controversies with the emperorover supreme authority did not extend much beyond doctrinal claims over eachother’s domain, and neither side effectively controlled the clerical aristocracy.The seat of the pope at Rome was little more than an honorific center containingthe relics of Saint Peter, which constituted a physical symbol of the transmissionof charismatic authority; but it had no far-reaching organizationalapparatus, and its ties to most of Christendom were primarily as a focal point456 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsfor pilgrimages (Southern, 1970: 94–100). In these respects it was like Mecca,which never did develop any “papal” authority.Between 1050 and 1130 Rome began to experience a rapid growth inlitigation coming from the monasteries, asking for autonomy vis-à-vis localbishops, confirmation of their property rights, and special insignia of religiousrank. R. W. Southern (1970: 113) calls it “a scramble for honours, dignitiesand exemptions.” The growth of the new monastic orders was riding on acompetitively expanding market for symbolic goods. Around 1130–1150 thismonastic litigation was joined by other ecclesiastical as well as secular claimants.The pope was asked to settle disputes over property appointments amongrival jurisdictions, and to confer exemptions and benefits. By the early 1300s,the volume of papal correspondence had grown a hundredfold since 1130(Southern, 1970: 109). Rome became full of lawyers, and the papacy grewFIGURE 9.2. PROLIFERATION OF CISTERCIAN MONASTERIES,1098–1500 (Source: Southern, 1970: 254)Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 457wealthy off the fees of litigation and the spoils of the lawsuits. A large administrativestaff sprang up at the papal court, the first bureaucracy to appear inmedieval Europe.The papacy now had a patronage network extending all over Europe,outshining that of any secular ruler. The pope began to exert control over theregional bishops, disputing the appointment power of secular rulers; by the1300s, the papacy was claiming control over lower clerical appointments aswell. Central authority was enforced by sending papal legates to overseematters on the spot. Local episcopal bureaucracies expanded in turn. With itsheavy hand in property holdings and legal transactions, the church becameindispensable to the growing commercial economy. Trained clerics became themainstay of secular governments because of their monopoly over literateadministration. The church also moved to take control over armed force.Militant evangelists as well as popes preached Crusades against infidels on theMuslim and pagan frontiers, and against heretics within. Combined with theefforts of the church to enforce domestic peace by ending the fighting amongfeudal lords (Bloch, 1961: 412–421), these developments now fostered theconcept of Christendom as an armed state in which the military aristocracyfollowed the chain of command from the church. Riding the momentum of itssuccessful drive for organizational independence from the kings, the papacy atits height in the mid-1200s went on to claim supremacy in temporal power.2The universities resulted from the combined expansion of monasteries andthe papacy (Rashdall, 1936; Cobban, 1975, 1988; Ferruolo, 1985; Stone,1974a). As competition among the monastic schools increased, the network ofteachers detached itself into specialized organizations in their own right. Thethickest part of the network formed into universities, specializing in theologyand in the subjects that led up to it. The papacy and the universities fed offeach other. As church administration turned bureaucratic, its ranks becamefilled by university-trained theologians and canon lawyers. Conversely, thegrowing centralization of the church put at its disposal benefices and officeswhich were used as patronage for students and graduates of the universities.There were other roots of university schooling; guilds of the teachers of secularlaw and of medicine were also forming, but these soon attached themselves tothe church-sanctioned university structure in order to gain the legal right tomonopolize teaching and grant official degrees.The universities became the center of intellectual life. The greatest creativityin abstract ideas took place in subjects preparatory to the advanced degrees,that is, in logic, philosophy, and natural science, which made up the “undergraduate”part of the curriculum. As the university elaborated its internalstructure, the autonomous dynamic of the intellectual community was set freein the sector which was most insulated from outside concerns. Theology stayed458 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathscloser to external conditions; it too experienced plenty of controversies anddevelopments, but these were in the realm of more anthropomorphic andparticularistic conceptions, such as the cult of the Virgin Mary, or tied topolitical struggles over the wealth and secular power of the church. The fieldof law was creative in its own sphere, especially in the areas of corporationsand property, subjects which had great long-term significance for the Europeaneconomy and for the political trajectory of self-government (Berman, 1983).But law was largely separate from philosophical developments, and theircreativity was specialized into different universities (Radding, 1985, 1988).Philosophy was strong in the universities specializing in theology, above allParis and Oxford; law was creative especially in the universities of northernItaly, headed by Bologna. This was the region where the church-state conflictwas most intense, the battleground of territorial struggles between the papacyand the Holy Roman Emperor. Law was stimulated as an instrument of thisstruggle.Institutional Divergence with IslamIslam and Christendom have many external conditions in common. Both areregions organized by universalistic religions on the periphery of old bureaucraticempires, Rome and/or Persia; both were built on tribal coalitions newlydeveloped into states; both have doctrines of anthropomorphic monotheism,modeling their God on an omnipotent political ruler who demands bothobedience and action on his behalf. Both religions, along with their progenitor,Judaism, symbolically exalt a ruling personality and thus give an emphasis tomoral relationships and to political and social activism.But Islam’s variants on the central Christian institutions are significantlydifferent. Monasticism is virtually absent in Islam. There are ascetics anddevotees of religious exercises, but they do not form property-owning corporations.Sufi asceticism was not especially concerned with celibacy. This isimportant because a celibate organization necessarily breaks its ties with families;thus it can become an independent force acting apart from the interestsof kinship groups. The Sufi brotherhoods, in contrast with Christian monasticorders, were much more embedded in the politics and status concerns of laysociety. In addition, the monasteries had a much greater capacity for amassingwealth and organizational resources. There was a modest equivalent in Islamin the form of religious endowments (waqf) such as schools, hospitals, andcharities (Hodgson, 1974: 2:51, 136; Makdisi, 1981: 35–74). These could holdproperty, and were used by wealthy patrons as a device to evade inheritancelaws and restrictions on investment (Garcin, 1988: 121–123). But such religiouscorporations lacked autonomy from lay interests and control. What isAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 459missing is the dynamic role of the monasteries of Christian Europe, both inamassing wealth and power for an autonomous church sector, and in providinga base for intellectual networks.The papacy had some parallel in the caliphate, but the trajectory wasdifferent. The leader of Islam was simultaneously a military and a politicalruler. Islam emerged as a successful military conquest, whereas Christianity innorthern Europe made its way by conversion and cooperation with the tribalrulers, who eventually became a feudal aristocracy. Islam initially was a theocracysuch that the strongest popes of the 1200s dreamed of becoming. Evenwhen the caliphate after 900 crumbled into de facto independent secular states,Muslim religious movements aimed at the reconquest of political power. Islamicreligious organization was less autonomous, more tied to the families ofthe ruling aristocracy; the various ShiÀite movements all aimed to restore thepurity of dynastic succession. This gave a particularistic emphasis to Islamictheology and made a social basis for the long-standing opposition to rationaltheology, which shifted to more universalistic grounds.Because of its political connection, Islamic religion never became a bureaucraticallyorganized church, and there was no specialized (and celibate) priesthood.Rulers were expected to uphold Islamic law, to appoint religious judges,and to provide for the material upkeep of mosques; the church itself had noproperty. Pious laymen could take the initiative in learning and expoundingIslamic texts and traditions; the learned Àulama, something like the Jewishrabbis (teachers, not priests), were simultaneously religious, legal, and politicalleaders of the community. They provided a quasi-democratic (or at leastdecentralizing) counterbalance against the rulers, and in times of governmentweakness became de facto political dominants. They formed the basis of areligious intellectual life, but one which was closely attached to the politics andthe indigenous symbolic life of the community. As a structural base for ideas,they supported particularism and traditionalism more than did the autonomousChristian Church.Universities in a strict sense did not exist in Islam. One can speak looselyof the Baghdad House of Wisdom or the Córdoba library in this way, but thesewere not centers of instruction with bodies of teachers and students, much lessuniversities which granted degrees and monopolistic licenses over the higherprofessions. In the period of the strong caliphate, the centers of higher educationwere in the mosques, where circles of pupils gathered around particularteachers. The rational theologians emerged in this way in the mosque at Basraand developed circles elsewhere; the most common type of teaching circle,however, consisted of those that formed around teachers of law. After 1050more formally organized schools became widespread. The madrasas were waqfendowed colleges, providing salaries for teachers and dormitories and stipends460 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsfor students. The madrasas resembled universities in some aspects, though withcrucial differences (Makdisi, 1981; Huff, 1993).Whereas the European university was a self-governing corporation whichacquired privileges and immunities from local control, the madrasa was underthe control of the lay waqf donor. Most of the universities were guilds ofteachers, who pushed their internal autonomy to set sequences of degrees.Teachers’ guilds existed in Islam to some extent, but these were separate fromany particular school and did not act as a corporate body in the actualadministration of school affairs. In effect the university was a combination ofguild and waqf in one corporate institution, whereas in Islamic education thetwo components were separate. The Islamic teachers gave formal degrees inthe shape of certificates denoting that a pupil had learned a particular book,and these eventually became licenses to teach and to issue legal opinions. TheChristian universities developed formal degrees more extensively: the sequencesof Master of Arts, Bachelor and Doctor of Laws, of Medicine, and of Divinity.These were issued by the corporation rather than the individual teacher, andvalidated by the charter of the pope or ruler. The university degrees elaboratedinto a system of credentials, used both internally within the teaching worldand as a claim to positions within the church hierarchy. Whereas in Christendomthe bureaucratic papacy developed arm in arm with the expansion of themonopolistic system of university credentials, in Islam the lack of a churchhierarchy, and eventually of any central religious authority at all, turned theeducational structure in a different direction.The most fateful difference for intellectual matters was the much greaterdifferentiation of theology from law in the Christian universities, and theresulting opening for philosophy. In Islam, both law and theology were basedon the same texts, the holy scriptures and traditions. Islam made no distinctionbetween civil and canon law, faculties which were separate in the Christianuniversities. In the period before 900, Islamic law and rational theology weredifferentiating, but the separation never became institutionalized and legitimated.Since the teachers of law were also practicing judges, law was morepractical than theoretical; and since law was closely tied to scripture, lawyersand theologians were rivals over the same turf. This difference in organizationalbases is one reason why there was more conflict between literal scripturalismand rational theology in Islam than in Christendom. The rise of themadrasas was simultaneously the victory of law in monopolizing formal teachinginstitutions. There was no independent faculty of theology, nor along withit a place where philosophical issues could become a specialty. Secular philosophyfrom Greek and non-Islamic sources was officially excluded from themadrasas as an enemy of orthodoxy.Nevertheless, logic and dialectic found their way into the curriculum asAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 461auxiliary studies. Formal argument was studied as a preparation for legalpractice, and disputations in the madrasas resembled the disputations whichundergirded the scholastic method of textual argument in the universities. Themadrasas never became creative centers either in logic or in philosophy morebroadly. They lacked the internal structure of the universities, where theseparation of the preliminary arts from theology and law allowed networks ofinnovating intellectuals to build up in the most insulated areas of the organization.As elsewhere in Islam, there were institutional elements which weresimilar to Christianity, but they were combined in different proportions; thebalance was different, the outcome intellectually more conservative and traditional.The Sequence of External Changes in the Bases of Intellectual LifeRecall our sociological conception of intellectual change. There is a two-stepflow of causality. External conditions change the material bases in whichintellectuals work; their networks then adjust to the new competitive space,rearranging the cultural capital they have carried over from the previousperiod. Creativity is especially prominent at each institutional turning point.Schematically, then, we expect the following in medieval Christendom:1. The takeoff of the reformed monasteries. This is a period of intensecompetition over religious status and expansion of religious participationthroughout the society. It is the period of the wandering dialecticians, culminatingin the creativity of Anselm and Abelard.2. The growth of the bureaucratic papacy, shifting the center of intellectuallife to the universities. This is the time of high scholasticism, the building offormal systems, the search for additional cultural capital by imports from theold Mediterranean sources. Philosophical creativity results from the synthesisof these materials. Another institutional factor emerges in this period. The monasticsector, which is now taking a back seat to the new church organizations,puts forth another set of movements. These are the friars, orders of monksoutside the monasteries, active in doctrinal disputes and in the life of the cities.The Franciscans and Dominicans move to where the intellectual action is, andsoon their rivalry dominates theology and philosophy at the universities.3. The last phase of medieval intellectual life, following from the crisis ofthe papacy which sets in around 1300. The bid for theocratic power crests andfails. The very organizational resources that were built up by the church areturned against it. The dynamic monasteries had built a wealthy economy,which now spills over into the non-church sector. Kingdoms consolidate,especially in England and France; the city-states of northern Italy prosper underrival patronage of emperor and pope. There are now positions for lawyers and462 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsadministrators outside the church. The loyalty of the clergy is split. Nationalblocs appear within the church; secular power over clerical appointmentsreasserts itself. The election of the pope itself becomes a target for secularfactions. During the Avignon period, the papacy becomes increasingly dependenton the French, its old ally in struggle against the German-based emperor.Instead of becoming a theocracy of Christendom extending across Europe, thepapacy concentrates its temporal power in its own feudal possessions in centralItaly. By 1400, the pope is largely embroiled in Italian warfare and is reducedto acting much like another local prince.4. The declining international orientation of the papacy and the shift ofadministrative patronage to secular courts, constituting the surrounding conditionsfor late medieval thinkers. Universities still exist, indeed proliferate withthe rivalry of national and city patrons. But they become bases of factionsrather than points of creative intersection. The scholasticism and philosophicaltheology of the university synthesis is put on the defensive by intellectuals whoare now based outside, constituting the lay-oriented movements of mystics andHumanists.5. The breakup of its organizational base, which puts late medieval Christianityin a decentralized condition somewhat like that of the later period ofIslam. Both religious regions end up with a number of features in common:the loss of a network center, the decline in creativity, the attack on abstractideas, the predominance of mysticism. But the cultural capital each has accumulatedis different. One source of the difference is that the Christian intellectualnetworks develop later, and part of their cultural capital consists inimporting the most sophisticated abstractions accumulated during the thickestperiod of the Islamic networks. Christian thinkers are able to use Ibn Sina andAverroës, late products of the Arab networks that were closing down in theirregion of origin. But these could be imported so eagerly—indeed, were deliberatelysought out—because an initial similarity between the institutions of thetwo regions guaranteed that Christendom could import the kinds of ideas withwhich it was already familiar. Added to the more “leftward” balance offactional disputes within Christendom, these imports made for a richer accretionof philosophy by the time their own creative period was over.The Inner Autonomy of the UniversityFirst Thickening of the NetworksChristian philosophy became creative in a movement of wandering dialecticiansthat rapidly grew up in northern France after 1000.3 Figure 9.3 showsthe familiar pattern of linkage among the most important intellectual creators,Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 463FIGURE 9.3. CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHERS, 1000–1200: FORMINGTHE ARGUMENTATIVE NETWORKnot only in chains of significant masters and pupils but also in rivalries. Thenetwork center shows where the action is: around Abelard, who not onlystudied with everyone but also debated with everyone; and in the extraordinarycomplication of the network of important thinkers four to six generations later,where the lightning bolts of controversy surround Thomas Aquinas, Henry ofGhent, Duns Scotus, William of Ockham, and several others (see Figure 9.4).The network builds up charges of creative energy and discharges them at itspoints of maximal tension, like an electric field giving off current.From the beginning, the networks are organized in chains of leading mastersand pupils interwoven by conflicts. Anselm’s teacher, the most eminent ofthe time, was Lanfranc, who disputed with Berengar of Tours over the existenceof universals; in the next generation Anselm disputed with Abelard’s teacherRoscelin. There was a third party to these disputes, comprising scripturalistssuch as Peter Damiani, Otloh of St. Emmeran, and Manegold of Lautenbach,who attacked the whole business of dialectic as un-Christian. There was nodoubt provocation in Berengar’s application of dialectic to deny the transubstantiationof the Host, or Roscelin’s application of nominalism to the Trinitywith the conclusion that it must consist of three individuals. The intensity ofcreative energy was being driven upward by this Christian version of thedispute between kalam and hadith. It was this context which fostered Anselm’screation of one of the most famous of all metaphysical arguments, his ontologicalproof for the existence of God.Scripturalists such as Damiani had taken the line against the dialecticiansthat God is superior to logic, indeed that God’s will can change the laws oflogic. Anselm, educated in the secular schools of Italy, and teaching at theNorman monastery at Bec, where recruitment and even income depended onits fame as a center of learning, was primed to rise to the challenge. For him,reason is the very basis of scripture. If Christ had never existed, it would stillbe possible to show the logical necessity of human salvation, the Incarnation,the Trinity, even details such as the virgin birth (Monologium, esp. Preface;Cur Deus Homo)—points which more moderate philosophers such as ThomasAquinas later regarded as mysteries understandable only by faith. The oppositionsof the intellectual field threw Anselm’s energy into the extreme rationalistcorner. Against nominalist philosophers such as Roscelin, he held out forthe primacy of general ideas, prior to and untouched by experience. From thisarose Anselm’s dissatisfaction: Could he find a single sufficient proof of themost important reality of all, the existence of God, which did not depend onchains of argument that included empirical premises? After much struggle theanswer came to him: the highest of all concepts must be that which includesits own existence; for if it did not exist, it would be less perfect than anotherconception which did exist. Anselm builds his proof using the sole rationalcriterion of avoiding contradiction.Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 465Anselm’s proof is one of the monuments of Western philosophy, provokingcontroversy immediately and at intervals ever since. Its fertility comesfrom the way it succinctly poses boundary issues of the field: the nature ofrational criteria, of self-reference and contradiction, of the border between thetranscendental and the humanly accessible. How was this metaphysical peakreached so early in the medieval Christian network? This was no situation ofconceptual naiveté; the networks were relatively new but built on the accumulatedconcepts of Greek philosophy. The reality of universals was an issuetransmitted from late antiquity by the attempt of Boethius to synthesize Platoand Aristotle.4 The relatively shallow networks at the time of renewed intellectuallife after 1000 set up fairly simple, intense lines of conflict, as a resultof which the anti-rationalists within theology allowed the rationalist positionto come out in full purity.The chain of followers of Lanfranc, Anselm, and Roscelin, as well as theanti-philosophical conservatives, soon produced a more complex lineup ofconflicts. This thickening of the network shifted the focus toward the natureof concepts and of argument itself. The self-consciousness of the networkmanifests itself in the person who is most thoroughly connected among itsfactions. Peter Abelard, a knight-errant of dialectic, wandered from group togroup challenging the masters. Abelard is linked with Anselm at second remove,and directly with at least three secondary figures and a host of minorfigures of his time. In this vortex Abelard rejected both realism and nominalism,innovating an epistemology focusing on the process of abstraction itself,breaking new ground in logic and theory of meaning. The sharpening of logicalconcepts was the second great monument of medieval creativity.Abelard’s most powerful opponent, Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, was thegreatest of the anti-philosophers, building in opposition to the dialecticians amysticism of devotion. The two men were rival organizers of the social structurestaking shape at this time. Abelard was the foremost of the new breed,the professional teachers now proliferating in northern France; his technicalinterests were those of a group which was gradually becoming self-consciousas an occupational guild that would soon form the university. Bernard was thecharismatic leader of monastic reform, whose Cistercian order was explodingwith hundreds of new foundations (Figure 9.2). Bernard’s energy came fromthe possibilities of power within burgeoning social organizations and movements.He preached the Crusade as the church became the vehicle for themilitary coordination of Christendom; at home he attempted to stamp outdivisions within the church, persecuting Abelard and his like for heresy. Nothingepitomizes the situation better than Bernard descending on Paris in 1139to preach the danger of mere learning and to bring back converts from theschools to the Cistercian citadels on the frontiers (Ferruolo, 1985: 47).466 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFor all the success of Bernard’s monasteries, the pull of the intellectualmarketplace was even stronger. Although Abelard in his old age was condemnedto imprisonment in a monastery, the network of teachers continuedto thicken, and the schools became more concentrated and permanent. SaintBernard’s mysticism, not so much contemplative as a program of spiritualexercises and virtues, was developed by other members of his austere order ofCistercian monks. By the next generation, their anti-intellectualism was alreadyfading into philosophical interpretations of mysticism. A comprehensive academicmysticism was taught at the Abbey of St. Victor in Paris, where Hughof St. Victor included all the secular arts as a basis of contemplation, leadingup through a hierarchical classification as allegorical signs of God in the world.As the Parisian schools became institutionalized, a rival node of the networkgathered prestige at Chartres. Bernard of Chartres and his pupils defendedclassical learning and a theological Platonism, staking their claim forattention on their stock of ancient culture. It is not surprising to find theChartres network taking the lead in seeking translations from the Arab world,sending emissaries to Toledo and to Sicily in search of texts to bolster itsposition.Around 1200 the older chains gradually ran out (see Figures 9.3 and 9.4).The older mysticism, in both anti-intellectual and systematic forms, had faded;so had nominalism and even Abelard’s sophisticated technical logic. AlthoughAbelard had many important pupils, the most famous of them exemplified theskepticism and eclecticism that emerged after two or three generations of acrowded intellectual field. John of Salisbury was a network sophisticate, pupilnot only of Abelard but also of Gilbert of Poitiers, acquaintance of Hugh ofSt. Victor and even of Saint Bernard. John regarded the controversies of histime with mild skepticism, and espoused a doctrine that knowledge can be onlyprobable at best. For him the problem of universals had existed since ancienttimes and was no doubt insoluble.From this time dates the development of the sheer technical aspect ofintellectual life—not in the subtleties of Abelard’s logic, which were forgotten,but in what became the scholastic method. Abelard’s most successful pupil wasPeter Lombard, not an original thinker but the compiler of Sentences, a bookof opinions on disputed questions. It became the most popular textbook ofmedieval times; the predominant mode of composition came to be the practiceof writing a commentary on Lombard’s Sentences. The success of his compilationagainst others which were appearing at the same time was primarily dueto the place of his chain at Paris, where Lombard was master of the cathedralschool at Notre Dame from 1140 to 1159, and then bishop of Paris. For thecathedral school was then turning into the nucleus of the University of Paris,and Peter Lombard’s faithful pupil Peter of Poitiers became its first chancellor.Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 467The vivid battles of Abelard’s day contrast strangely with the unoriginaland pedantic fruits of his intellectual children and grandchildren. But thegenealogy is palpable nevertheless. Abelard and his fellow combatants hadmade Paris the focus of intellectual attention, a central meeting place thatbecame institutionalized in famous schools. And Abelard himself laid downthe first great example of a textbook, his Sic et Non, early in the century, inwhich he set forth contradictory passages from the Church Fathers arrangedaround abstract philosophical issues. The method had emerged a generationearlier in the hands of canon lawyers; shortly after Abelard, the concordanceof conflicting legal texts was made a systematic compilation by the greatGratian at Bologna (Grabmann, 1909–1911; Kantorowicz, 1938). The legaland theological faculties were forming simultaneously and in mutual influence.Abelard’s Sic et Non gave the intellectual community one of its great pieces ofcultural capital, a set of puzzles over which to work. The scholastic methodwas to flourish in a kind of architectural splendor; later commentators fromBonaventure down to Ockham would marshal authorities first on one side ofa question, then on the other, systematically refuting and approving andweighing in the balance. As intellectual life heated up again in the next century,these texts became monuments to the thoroughness and subtlety of an intellectualcommunity taking seriously its history and its conflicts, the two structuralingredients of creativity.Universities and Encyclopedic ScienceThe intellectual life that took off again in the generations after 1200 wasshaped by several factors. The free-standing schools were amalgamating andformalizing into universities. With this came a move to extend the branches ofknowledge and to present them in encyclopedic compendia. The Arab philosophieswere imported, in two waves represented by Avicenna’s Neoplatonismand Averroës’s Aristoteleanism, followed by the Greek texts themselves. Thegap in the chains of important names at the end of the 1100s coincides withthe time when texts were pouring in from the Arab world. The temporarydownturn in indigenous creativity is typical of what happens during a generationof importers. The narrower base of Neoplatonist and late Roman textson which the first wave of Christendom had built its philosophy was nowswamped by the wider range of rediscovered Greek philosophy. The nominalismwhich Christian philosophers had constructed was forgotten in the prestigeof ancient texts; nominalism would not be heard again until Ockham fourgenerations later. In world perspective, what is striking is how quickly Christianphilosophers recovered from their dependence on imported ideas. Impetuswas given by their new organizational base.468 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsThe first philosophical reputations among those congregating at Paris (andto a lesser degree at Oxford) arose from the struggle to assimilate or refute theArab ideas (see Figure 9.4). William of Auxerre produced a Christianizedversion of Avicenna; he was appointed by the pope in 1228 to a commissionto correct the dangerous newest import, the Averroist texts of Aristotle. Williamof Auvergne, theology master and then bishop of Paris from 1228 to1249, systematized a doctrine in reaction against the Arab Aristoteleanism,drawing on Saint Augustine but bolstered by pieces of Avicenna. Alexander ofHales produced a scholastic Summa that compiled conservative Augustinianand Victorine ideas while dealing with problems posed by Aristotle.At the same time, specialized branches of knowledge were expanding andpulling free of theology, finding niches in the differentiating organization ofuniversity studies. Scientific texts were being translated from Arabic, comprisingancient Greek works in astronomy, mathematics, medicine, and othersciences, together with Arab advances. Those individuals who were closest tothis inflow were able to carve out a distinctive niche in the field. Albert ofBollstadt, a German nobleman who as a young man studied near the Italiancenters of translation, became filled with the ambition of compiling and completingthe scientific works of the Greeks. He became Albert the Great out ofthe sheer energy with which he pursued this goal, ranging through all the fieldsof knowledge from theology to botany, and from plants and gems to occultismand magic.Albert’s encyclopedic works are impressive mainly for their scope. Albertregarded himself as following Aristotle, which he did in the arrangement ofthe sciences, and in holding that knowledge is based on the senses, and thatthere is no certainty regarding insensibles. Yet Albert’s ontology is much closerto Neoplatonism. For him the soul is an intellectual substance, not the formof the body (as it was for Aristotle and for Aquinas). Universals are divineIdeas situated in God; the human soul has knowledge of universals by divineillumination, much along the lines of Augustine’s doctrine of the inner light.Albert and several generations of followers remained more Neoplatonist thanAristotelean. Here the Europeans repeated the stance of the Muslims beforeAverroës; although Aristotle was available in his own words, he was interpretedconservatively, as close to an idealist religious metaphysics as possible.An independent Aristoteleanism awaited the radical Averroists and Albert’sown independent pupil, Thomas Aquinas.Natural scientists and encyclopedists are concentrated in these two generations,1200–1265.5 The most famous are those who combined these secularimports with theology. In England, Robert Grosseteste, ahead of other scholarsof his day in acquiring Greek, synthesized what he had learned fromgeometry texts with the older Augustinian doctrine of divine illumination (onAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 469FIGURE 9.4. FRANCISCAN AND DOMINICAN RIVALRIES,1200–1335 (All Paris unless marked)470 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsGrosseteste, see Southern, 1992). For Augustine this had been a psychologicaland epistemological doctrine; for Grosseteste it became expanded into a cosmology.His speculative system declares that the world is formed of light. Godcreated a point of light, Grosseteste posits, which spread out as a sphere,rarefying until it reached a limit; this constituted the outermost celestial sphererecognized by contemporary astronomy and cosmology. From this sphere lightbounced back by reflection to the lower spheres of the planets, eventuallyforming the earth at the center. Grosseteste worked out the geometric theoryof angles and lines of reflection, drawing on the Arab science of optics. Thissplendid visual image of the universe of spheres, rays, and golden light had apowerful appeal throughout the century; three generations later Dante used it,though associating it erroneously with Averroës.Out of Grosseteste’s circle of scholars promoting Greek learning cameRoger Bacon, who became the most famous by taking the most radical line.Like a number of others of his day interested in science, Bacon had considerableindependent wealth to put into his researches (he reports spending the hugesum of £2,000 on experiments; DSB, 1981: 1:377). Structurally he was acompetitor of his contemporary Albert, whom he violently attacked, along withAlexander of Hales, Thomas Aquinas, and most others; even where Bacongrudgingly respects Albert, he accuses him of teaching before he has learned.Bacon is nevertheless dependent on Arabic doctrines. He uses an Averroistvocabulary, but his cosmology is the familiar light universe. Bacon’s mainoriginality is in advocating and promoting experimental science; his ownresearches led to nothing concrete, and his encyclopedic efforts ranging intofields such as astrology and alchemy yielded little advance. Even his epistemologyis rather naive; though resolutely overthrowing Platonic realism and illuminationistdoctrines, he expects that experience and experiments will producecomplete certitude.Bacon was in fact a propagandist, publicizing his position by violent attackson contemporary rivals, holding that they were living in a time of barbaricsuperstition and awe of authorities. This historical condition he explains, afterthe fashion of a moralistic preacher, as the result of human sins which havecaused us to lose the ancient wisdom. Here Bacon gives away the source of hisown energy: he was the most aggressive importer of pagan cultural capital atthe time when the market was just opening. In a maneuver strangely foreshadowingNewton’s maniacal private studies 400 years later, Bacon wrote asynthesis of pagan myths and biblical history. Atlas, Prometheus, Apollo,Zoroaster, and others down to the time of King Solomon are held to haveknown the true science of nature; because this was subsequently lost, we mustnow work empirically to regain it.Bacon paid the price for his contentious stance. Having joined the Francis-Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 471cans about 1257, he was accused of indiscipline and confined under arrest intheir house in Paris for perhaps as long as twenty years. But to see this as thestory of a lonely rebel against authority is to miss the structure which constitutedBacon’s originality and his fame. He was far from isolated, and indeedput himself at the center of the major networks at a time when the realigningblocs were opening up possibilities of creativity in many directions. Bacon’sfriendship with the scholar Guy Foulques, who became Pope Clement IV in1265–1268, provided both the immediate instigation of his major writings andtheir dissemination. Bacon achieved nothing substantive in his program. Hiscreativity was to push his network relationships as antagonistically as possibleand to formulate a doctrine from this opposition.The Friars’ Movement: Monks outside the MonasteryAnother structural feature of this period was a new line of organizationalrivalry superimposed on the rest. Grosseteste and William of Auvergne werevirtually the last important philosophers for a century who were ordinaryclergy; most of the rest were either Franciscans or Dominicans. There was aflood of enthusiasm for these movements which brought even the most hardcoreacademics and intellectuals into their ranks. We have seen the troublehis membership made for Bacon, but his act of joining was not idiosyncratic.Alexander of Hales, well established as a theologian in Paris, joinedthe Franciscans late in life, and was rewarded with their theology chair at theuniversity in 1231. Albert of Bollstadt was recruited by the head of theDominicans himself, an associate of Saint Dominic, while at the schools inItaly.The structural rivalry between Franciscans and Dominicans existed fromthe outset. Saint Francis and Saint Dominic were contemporaries, and theirorders were given papal sanction around 1220, within a few years of eachother (Brooke, 1959; Mandonnet, 1937; Bennett, 1971). On the surface thereis a sharp contrast: the gentle Francis preaching to the birds and humblyvisiting the poor; Saint Dominic combating heresy amid the Albigensian Crusadein Languedoc. Together they constitute the second great wave of theexpanding monasticism, following the first wave of economically successfulmonasteries epitomized by Saint Bernard’s Cistercians a century before. Christendomwas acquiring a unifying organizational core. The papacy was becominga state above the feudal states, and the universities were growing withthe spread of church bureaucracy. The new monastic movements, orientedtoward activism in the world, were part of a growing mood of victoriousChristianization of the social order. The status order was changing, and a senseof enthusiasm spread among the population, which now had the possibility472 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsof appropriating these status-giving religious activities for themselves. Therival movements of friars—frères, brotherhoods of religious participation—were organizationally similar because they were halfway between laymen andmonks: living under monastic vows and commitments, giving up family lifeand private property, but residing in the public world, where they exemplifiedthe religious life of good works.Within less than a generation the friars had arrived at the universities, andwere soon bidding to dominate them. This was not at all their original intention.The Dominicans were on an ideological campaign to stamp out unbelieverswithin a doctrinally unified Christendom; the Franciscans were on a missionof charity among the poor. But their rapid organizational growth, their successin sheer numbers, brought a rapid rationalization in the Weberian sense. TheFranciscans were particularly successful, mushrooming to some 28,000 by1300, against the Dominicans’ 12,000.6 The new universities, awarding recognizeddegrees, were laying out formal credentials that rapidly permeated churchbureaucracy, legal practice, and the monopoly over teaching. The Dominicans,whose explicit mission was to preach orthodoxy, easily gravitated towardformally organized teaching. At first they organized their own training schools,but these quickly became residential adjuncts to universities or (as at Cologne)the nucleus of future universities. In the 1230s established and aspiring universityteachers themselves joined the orders in droves, thereby bringing thecenter of gravity of the friars’ own training into the university world.There was a material advantage favoring the friars over the secular students.Most students had to struggle for patronage to support their studies,spending a good deal of time applying for prebends, and usually interruptingtheir studies between their M.A. (taken around age 25) and their doctorate intheology or law (taken around 40) to serve their patron in ecclesiastical orgovernmental administration (Southern, 1970: 292–295). The friars’ housesunderwrote the expense of student life; for their teachers, the orders providedendowed positions. The orders separated studies from the political scramblefor preferment, thus clearing a space in which intellectual life could be pursueduninterruptedly and on its own terms.7For the preaching-oriented Dominicans, the move into the universities wasless of an ideological contradiction than for the Franciscans, with their emphasison poverty, charity, and the mission to the poor. Nevertheless, organizationalrivalry pulled them along the same path, where their very success madeentanglements permanent. The connection of the orders with the papacy at thetime when it was bidding for theocratic power within Europe brought theminto the inner corridors of church politics. Friars were pressed into service asbishops and even archbishops and cardinals. The success of the Franciscanspulled them all the more rapidly into the establishment.Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 473Once inside the university realm, the friars found that their ideologies wererapidly replaced by the normal abstract concerns of academic intellectuals.Lines of struggle over the focus of attention within intellectual networks becamesuperimposed on their identities as Franciscans and Dominicans. Withina generation the Franciscan John Peckham could declare that his order and theDominicans were so separate in philosophy that they had nothing in commonbut the fundamentals of Christian doctrine (Gilson, 1944: 540). At the sametime, there were struggles within each order over its philosophical position.Much of the intellectual history of the next three generations was taken upwith the Franciscans’ internal factions, dominated by Bonaventure, Duns Scotus,and Ockham. The Dominicans also embraced two related positions: thatof Albert’s Neoplatonic Aristoteleanism, originally a framework for an encyclopediaof natural science, later modified in a mystical direction by his followerMeister Eckhart; and that of Thomas Aquinas’s Aristoteleanism, whicheventually became the official doctrine. For a short period there was also ananti-Thomist conservatism within the order, represented by Robert Kilwardby.To complete the picture of the university field, there was a third party basedoutside the two orders: the secular priests and clerics, often jealous of the friars,sometimes opposing them over university privileges. It is among this groupthat one finds a struggle for a third party intellectual position, most conventionallywith Henry of Ghent, but with greatest effect—not to say consternation—by the perceived advocacy of extreme “Averroism” by the young seculararts masters of the 1260s and 1270s.Let us take first the Franciscans in the generation of the mid-1200s. Baconwe have already met, the house radical. The house master was Saint Bonaventure,in the center of the network at Paris. Bonaventure attempted to upholdthe conservative Augustinian vision as best he could in the new conditions ofintellectual struggle. Nevertheless, he was a scholastic, marshaling argumentspro and con with the best of them. His metaphysical vision is a variant of thedoctrine of spheres of light, but carried through with more metaphysical skillthan in Grosseteste. The world is not an imitation or God or even a resemblance,since God is entirely different; yet the hierarchy of the world consistsof expressions, signs of God to be read by humans, both externally throughthe senses and internally in their own soul. Bonaventure incorporated Anselm’sontological proof into his system, adding the characteristic Augustinian doctrinethat it is God’s illumination within the soul that allows one to grasp theconcept of God which implies its own existence. It is not for nothing thatBonaventure acquired the soubriquet Seraphic Doctor; he offers the closestthing possible to Saint Francis’s bird sermons turned into a technical philosophy.At the fairly young age of 36, Bonaventure was elected general of the Fran-474 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsciscan order, responsible for its politics and its internal discipline even morethan its intellectual life. The silencing of Bacon must have taken place with hissupport, if not his initiative. This was doubtless a sideshow to more seriousconflicts. Already the Franciscans were being rent by a struggle between purist“spirituals,” who defended Francis’s original aim of a life of poverty andcharity, against those wielding power in the church and the universities. Butthe struggle was necessarily fought out in the realm of politics, where theadvocates of poverty were repeatedly condemned as their faith carried theminto currents of doctrinal heresy. To survive, the spirituals had to enter theterrain of academic subtleties. On the intellectual front, things would not standstill long enough for Bonaventure’s system to take hold. His main pupils, JohnPeckham and Matthew of Aquasparta, found themselves fighting rear-guardactions against the Averroists and against Aquinas. Before the dust of thatstruggle could settle, the battle lines had moved. The great Franciscans fromthe 1270s into the next century went far beyond Bonaventure: Peter John Olivi,Duns Scotus, Peter Aureoli, and William of Ockham.Revolt of the Arts FacultyThe emergence of the Averroists at Paris was a direct consequence of importingthe great commentaries on Aristotle from the Arab world. The transmissionof cultural capital was more than an accidental intrusion; factions of Christianintellectuals had been seeking out new texts to fill the knowledge space openedby the growth of education. Can we say that they were seeking just this sortof text? The translators and the schools which sent them sought the prestigeof ancient wisdom, that is to say, knowledge beyond the horizon of the existingChristian culture. Natural science was an appropriately neutral ground onwhich to expand in this way. And if the situation of intercultural contact inSpain had motivated Averroës to produce a new Aristotle and a new “religionof reason,” there was also a structural slot in the Christian intellectual worldtwo generations later which was prepared to exploit this product.The newly formalized universities had four higher faculties—civil law,canon law, theology, and medicine—though not every university had all ofthese, and most universities were eminent in only one. Preparatory to thesewas the arts faculty, in which were taught the preliminary “undergraduate”studies—dialectic, mathematics, and metaphysics. These were the slots intowhich natural science expanded most readily. The universities where philosophywas most developed were those in which theology dominated the higherfaculties, giving an especially abstract emphasis to its preparatory courses.8As the university became increasingly regulated, the theology masters jealouslyguarded their turf against the arts masters, repeatedly legislating againstAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 475mere philosophers teaching subjects belonging to theology. The prohibition didnot easily hold. God could also be taken as a subject of philosophy (forinstance, as the Unmoved Mover of Aristotle’s system of astronomical spheres).On the other side, rational theology easily turned into abstract issues ofphilosophy, and most of the great philosophers, on into the 1300s, did at leastpart of their work while teaching theology.The struggle which broke into the open in the 1270s is obscured in hindsightby the polemics which have survived, primarily those expressing theofficial position of the conservatives. The young radicals in the lower facultyare much less well known from the published record. At first, the very term“Averroist” was likely a hostile one imposed by their persecutors. The radicals,those who made the most extreme use of Aristotle and of “the Commentator,”as Averroës was honorifically known, were the arts masters, above all at thepreeminent university, Paris. Averroës’s version of Aristotle, formulated in aMuslim world when theology was much more estranged from philosophicalcircles, was a kind of religion of the intellectuals. It held that scripture is agross kind of metaphorical truth, sufficient only for the masses; and that purephilosophy is not just intellectually higher but itself the path to salvation. Thiswas supported metaphysically by the doctrine of the Agent (or Active) Intellect,a sphere of Ideas which shapes the sublunar world, and in which the humanintellect participates when it knows truth. For Averroës (and perhaps for someof his Parisian admirers) there is no individual immortality of the soul; eachhuman soul is immortal only to the extent that it is filled with philosophicaltruth and directly participates in the larger Agent Intellect of the world. Whenin 1270, and more forcefully in 1277, Averroism was condemned by the churchauthorities, probably the touchstone among the long list of prohibited propositionswas the one which maintained the unity of the Agent Intellect—thesingle world-soul in which all human souls participate.Also condemned was the proposition that the highest happiness humanscan know is philosophy, which is to say, rather than the Christian happinessof salvation. One of the few radicals who is known by name, Boethius of Dacia,wrote a prayer to the First Principle, discovered and contemplated by reason,the highest delectation of the soul. The religion of reason came into confrontationwith Christian religion. Most famous, perhaps because the relativemoderateness of his claims made him especially appealing, was Siger of Brabant,who would have been about 25 years old at the time when the controversystarted in the 1260s. Siger was the public figurehead of the movementand the personal target of philosophical attacks.The condemnation of 1277 was a concerted effort by conservatives of allcamps. The most important secular theologian of the period, Henry of Ghent,was on the panel of Bishop Tempier of Paris which issued the condemnation476 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsof 219 theses. The Dominican Kilwardby, in his capacity as archbishop ofCanterbury, issued much the same condemnation 11 days later, making theprohibition effective for Oxford as well. The Franciscan Peckham carried onthe battle in the spirit of his master Bonaventure. The so-called “Averroism”of the 1260s and 1270s may well have been rather mild; nothing very radicalmade its way into the surviving texts. The condemnation made it into a symbolof opposition to conservative dogmatism, an emblem for the self-styled progressivefaction. This faction continued to have an underground existence atParis, and even more openly at other universities, especially in Italy over thenext 200 years. Opposition outside the university became even more pointed.Intellectual life was becoming more cosmopolitan. Contact with the Muslimworld was fading, but the rationalistic wing of the Jewish network had movednorth, driven out of Spain in the atmosphere of increasing intolerance after thesuccess of the reconquest in the early 1200s. Maimonidist Aristoteleans andAverroists found their niche primarily as translators in the Latin world. Jewishcosmopolitans (15, 16, 23, and 26 in Figure 9.5) active in southern France andin Italy may well have been the leaders in spreading a purer Averroism in thegenerations after the condemnation of Siger of Brabant.As a philosophical doctrine within Christendom, Averroism was not particularlycreative. It advocated a finished system of truth, already perfected inAristotle (or, more precisely, in Averroës’s interpretation of him). The Averroistsbecame the structural equivalent of the Epicureans in the Greek networks,anchored in an extreme, and thus immune to new idea combinationsemerging in the conflicts which made up the creativity of the network center.The significance of the struggles at Paris lay not so much in the doctrineof the “Averroists,” although they served as the catalyst, as in the rearrangementbrought about in other intellectual factions. At first the counterattacksof the conservatives were too weak to do more than goad the conflict. Thecondemnation in 1270 of 15 propositions was evaded. The conservatives wereinfuriated, and charged the radicals with using transparent dodges, declaringthat the Averroist themes were false opinions set forth for purposes of debateor by the doctrine of a double truth—that what is true in philosophy is notnecessarily true in theology. The charges may well have been exaggerated, butthe resistance was real.By the time of the more sweeping condemnation of 1277, the circles ofconflict had widened on all sides. Kilwardby and Peckham attacked Aquinasalong with Siger, despite the fact that Aquinas himself had led the critique ofthe doctrine of double truth. For Kilwardby, the conflict was part of an internalstruggle within the Dominicans; for the Franciscan Peckham, it was an opportunityto attack the rival Dominican order itself. Some of Aquinas’s doctrineswere themselves included in the 1277 condemnation, but within a few yearsAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 477FIGURE 9.5. JEWISH PHILOSOPHERS WITHIN CHRISTENDOM,1135–1535: MAIMONIDISTS, AVERROISTS, AND KABBALISTSthese had become obligatory doctrine for the Dominicans, prohibited texts forstudy among the Franciscans. After Aquinas’s relatively early death in the midstof the struggle (indeed in the stress of his journey to Lyons, where he facedcondemnation), his pupil Giles of Rome defended his doctrine in famousdebates with Henry of Ghent.The time was the beginning of reversal in the fortune of the papacy, andof its allies in church politics.9 Not only were the Franciscans by far the biggestorder, but by the end of the century, they had achieved virtually a lock on papalinfluence with a majority on the Roman Curia. But the papacy itself wasoverreaching in its claims of secular power over the kings, and the politicaltides were turning. The condemnation of 1277, going far beyond the Averroiststo attack the other philosophical enemies of the dominant Franciscans, musthave looked like an arrogant abuse of power by a faction no longer strongenough to carry it off. The precipitate of these realignments was the greatestround of medieval philosophy.10Aquinas’s CompromiseThe greatness of Thomas Aquinas is as an intellectual politician. He was aman of moderation, going as far as possible with the new intellectual capitalof the time, but sharply distinguishing himself from the radicals. It is notsurprising that the church in centuries long past his time would lean increasinglyupon him for its official doctrine in a world of secularism and science.Aquinas strikes the balance between science and theology, and he does it faron the side of reason and, as much as possible, of empiricism. Aquinas holdsthat each level of being has its mode of knowledge. Since humans are not angels(which are simultaneously pure forms, logical species, and Intelligences), wecannot directly apprehend the intelligible world of universals, as the “Averroists”claimed; instead humans must proceed by means of particulars. It isemblematic of Aquinas that he places man in the very middle of the metaphysicalcosmos: highest of the material order, the human soul is just below theangels, which are the immaterial Ideas leading up to God.Aquinas is the great systematizer of philosophical and theological doctrine.If there is a core to his doctrine, it concerns the nature of the human soul. Thisis, so to speak, not only the midpoint of the universe but also a key point ofcontention between Averroists and Augustinian traditionalists. Furthermore,Aquinas’s conceptual strategy now ramifies into his arguments about the natureof God and into the rest of his system. For a traditionalist such as Bonaventure,matter is not corporeal only; incorporeals like angels are also individuals inmatter, although they are also universal forms, following the classic Neoplatonichierarchy. This doctrine makes it easy to prove that the human soul isAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 479immortal as an individual: it has a matter, quite apart from the intellect whichcognizes universals, and also apart from the form of the human body. Thusthere is no danger of falling into the Averroist position that only the intellectualpart of the soul is immortal by absorption into the world-soul Agent Intellect;nor is there danger of implying that the soul dies with the body, as a form ofthat body.Aquinas, however, directly courts these difficulties. For him, the soul is theform of the body—a traditional Aristotelean position. In hot debate againstthe Franciscan Peckham in 1270, he held that the sole principle of life and ofintellect in man is the soul, thus making the body an integral part of humannature, not an inferior dross to be shed by the spiritual part. How then toavoid falling into the Averroist or materialist side? Aquinas’s creative stroke isto attack a more fundamental metaphysical point: he overturns the acceptedargument, which Bonaventure had taken from Avicenna, that essence, what athing is, is a higher reality than existence, as if the fact of something’s existingwere merely an accident tacked onto its essence. This was a Platonic way oflooking at the world, in which eternal essences come down from the spheresbelow God into the realm of mere temporal existence.Aquinas reverses the situation: essence is merely potentiality, which becomesactual only by the act of existing. But here he goes against traditionalAristotelean views as well, since Aristotle had held that matter is potentiality,given actuality by form. Aquinas presses onward, rearranging these concepts:composite substances of the ordinary world are made up not only of matterand form, but of essence and existence as well. The essence of the human body,for instance, is a combination of matter and form; and both of these areactualized, drawn from the realm of mere potentiality, when they come intoexistence.This became the rallying point of the Thomists, the doctrine of the unityof form in the composite. A composite essence is made up out of all the formsthat are applicable (e.g., a man shares in the forms of human, rational, animal,etc.). This doctrine allows for full participation in the reality of the materialworld, and for sensory knowledge, while holding on to Christian doctrine ofindividual immortality and bodily resurrection. The cost, however, was tooverthrow prevailing Platonist and Augustinian metaphysics and epistemology.Applied to God, Aquinas’s concepts meant that God is a composite of Formand Act, not a Form of all forms, as in the Neoplatonic tradition carried onby Aquinas’s own teacher, Albert. Nor is God preeminently the locus of Ideas,as in the Augustinian version defended by Bonaventure. Nor is God a mysticalOne beyond being, since Aquinas argues that One is only a division of being.Aquinas’s compromise, together with the weight of Aristotelean thinkingin both heretical and nonheretical guises, completely reconstructed the premises480 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsof philosophical argument. The Franciscans were particularly badly hit, sinceBonaventure’s grand system was now unacceptable and in need of replacement.Something was needed to fill the gap: this turned out to be the ultra-system ofDuns Scotus.Duns Scotus and the Franciscan CounterattackConsider the overall condition of the intellectual field in the generations around1300. There was a remarkable richness of positions. The basic cultural capitalof the field was being broken apart once again; sizable new pieces were addedto the pool by contentious reflection, and there were great opportunities forcreative recombination. Conservatives as well as explicit reformers shared inthe riches. Henry of Ghent reacted against Aquinas and his followers byrejecting the primacy of existence and stressing that God possesses Ideas—essences—before Creation. In order not to reduce God to the level of Ideas,Henry described God as yet a further level of essence, the esse essential. Toavoid individuation by matter, Henry analyzed individuation as double negation:the negation of all differences within itself, and the negation of identitywith all others. Henry even incorporated the Muslims into his position, declaringthat Augustine’s concept of the divine illumination of the soul is the sameas Avicenna’s Agent Intellect (Gilson, 1944: 430). But this creative defense oftraditionalism merely provided a tempting target for Duns Scotus’s attack.There is little doubt that Duns Scotus was groomed by the Franciscans tobe their champion in restoring the philosophical eminence of their order.Though born in remote Scotland, he was picked up by the organization froman early age and given plenty of attention and encouragement; when he showedgrowing intellectual powers, he was sent to the centers of controversy and setthe major intellectual tasks of the day.11 Much as Thomas Aquinas had beenordered to the trouble spots of intellectual life as spokesman for the Dominicans30 years earlier, Duns was delegated to do battle for the Franciscans:restoring their prestige at Paris (Oxford remaining by and large a Franciscanstronghold), and even invading the Dominicans’ own stronghold at Cologne.Given the sociological principle that creativity takes place along lines ofmaximal opposition within the current level of abstraction in the intellectualfield, what might we predict that the champion of the Franciscans would do?The battlefield is no longer the same as that on which Aquinas maneuveredbetween Averroists and Augustinians; the nature of the soul and its immortalityis no longer a key point. Instead the highest prestige must be on the terrain ofthe new metaphysical doctrines Aquinas had introduced as weapons for hisstruggle. The impressive thing, however, is not to turn back the clock, rejectingAquinas’s concepts in the name of reasserting Augustine and Bonaventure;Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 481Henry of Ghent, outside Franciscan ranks, already took that tack. Duns Scotusinstead now attacks both sides. He seeks for doctrines giving maximal pointsof distinctness, and overturns not only old Neoplatonism and Augustinianism,but new Aristoteleanism as well. When Duns Scotus is through, the terrain ofthe intellectual field has been revolutionized as never before.In epistemology, Aquinas and the Aristoteleans gave primacy to sensoryknowledge of particulars: the human intellect most easily knows the essencesof material things. For Henry of Ghent, following the Augustinian tradition,the prime object of the intellect is God, who gives knowledge by illuminationof the divine Forms. Duns attacks both doctrines. What the human intellectknows most immediately and certainly is being, the absolutely unqualified,fundamental concept without which one could not think at all. Furthermore,being is univocal; it is behind all distinctions among modes of being. Dunscleverly establishes this with an argument about doubt: we can conceive ofbeing even if we are doubtful whether it is being in itself or being in anotherthing (i.e., whether it is existential assertion or predication, the logical copula).Duns undercuts here the Avicennean distinction between existence and essence,which had become conventional among Christian scholastics.Since being is the most primitive concept, he maintains, it is from beingthat we must start if we wish to prove the existence of God, or even to speakabout him. Moreover, a science cannot prove its basic principles but ratherbegins with them; hence it is because the highest object of metaphysics is notGod but being that we can prove the existence of God through metaphysics.Being is an absolutely transcendent concept, common to both the infinite andthe finite, to God and to creatures, to substance and accidents, matter andform. Duns reorganizes the entire scholastic tradition, which had awardedprimacy to one or the other wing of these dichotomies.Starting from being, Duns is able to state a proof of God which avoidsdepending on the empirical existence of contingent facts, that is, the kind ofproof that Aquinas had used in starting from causality, movement, or order inthe sensory world. Duns instead adopts a version of Anselm’s strategy. Let ussuppose that an ultimate or highest cause of the world does not exist; whatcould cause it not to exist? This would be self-contradictory, since the ultimatecause by definition has no cause; hence it is impossible that the uncaused causeshould not exist. It is also impossible to infer the existence of contingentbeings—of the ordinary world—from the existence of God. There is, in otherwords, no necessity why God should have created the world. The route ofNeoplatonic emanation is thus cut off, and so is any route which posits eternalForms in God. Although God is necessary, the world is logically unfounded.The world must be a miracle, to be seen with much the same awe as in naiveholy scripture.482 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsHaving overturned both the Platonic-Augustinian epistemologies and theirlinks to theology, Duns presses his attack on the principles of individuation.This had been one of the main areas of controversy and innovation in theprevious generation. Aquinas, overturning Platonic Forms and Bonaventure’sspiritual matter, had given matter as the principle of individuation. Henry ofGhent—for whom universal Forms are the higher reality—had held that individuationis nothing in itself but consists in a web of negations. Duns againattacks them both. Matter, he holds, is neither Aristotelean potentiality normerely part of a composite of forms, as Thomas had held; rather matter hasits own actuality and could exist without any form at all. That is to say, it isnot logically contradictory that God could create matter without form. Matteris real; therefore it cannot be merely the principle of individuation of forms.Duns arrives at a similar conclusion against Henry, for whom universalForms are the true realities and individuation merely negation. But the essenceof a thing is neither a universal nor a particular; all horses have a commonnature, which we can call “horseness,” but distinctions of universal andparticular do not arise in “horseness” in itself. Parallel to what Duns says aboutbeing, essence is univocal with respect to universality and particularity. Theuniversal is the way the common nature of a class of things is apprehended inthe mind; ideas are part of the realm of the intellect, and are founded in thecommon nature of things, but they are not things, nor even the constitutingprinciple of things. Duns here is drastically repudiating the Platonic heritageof Forms. For “horseness” in general to be the “horseness” of this particularhorse, there must be another metaphysical condition. Duns calls it haecceitas,“this-ness” (Latin: haec, “this”).It is, so to speak, the principle of individuation. But to call it a principledoes not capture the force of Duns’s conception. It is the opposite of Henry ofGhent’s claim that particularity is a mere aspect of negation in a worldcomposed of universals. This is immediately real, and that, and that. The worldis radically particular in a sense far beyond Aquinas’s world of forms individuatedby matter. It is this vision of Duns Scotus that made him admired bymodern existentialists such as Martin Heidegger: haecceitas is like Dasein,radical contingency of existence in the here-and-now, the being which is nevercaptured by abstractions. Propelled by opposition to the surrounding intellectualfield, Duns arrived at a radical break with the entire Greek tradition; wefind its nearest counterpart in distant traditions, above all in Buddhist mysticism.The Madhyamika Buddists (particularly Nagarjuna) had much thesame term, tathata, “thus-ness” (Sanskrit: tat, “that”), the reality that themeditator seeks when overturning attachment to name-and-form. The paradoxesof the Ch’an meditators, attacking the inadequacy of words, were directedtoward this experience.Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 483Duns is not a mystic. He did not arrive at haecceitas as the result ofmeditation or the attempt to explain what the meditation experience might beabout. His train of argument comes from contentions within the highly rationalisticintellectual community of his time. In Duns’s haecceitas, this communityargues itself beyond its own deepest premises. From now on it has two possiblefrontiers of transcendence, God and immediate reality: possible frontiers, becausethe struggles of the intellectual field did not immediately push upon bothof them.Duns overturns the hierarchical conception of the cosmos which had prevailedfor centuries. The Neoplatonic hierarchy of concepts and realities, aswell as Aristotelean levels of generality, are ordered according to their degreesof universality. But Duns declares that universals are merely a way that humansthink because of the imperfection of their cognitions. If one could know thehaecceitas of all things, one would have all possible knowledge of reality—althoughthis is impossible for a merely human intellect in its present condition,and presumably only God can know everything in this way. This position isthe extreme opposite from that of the Muslim philosophers, for instanceAvicenna, who held that God knows only through universals, not stooping toparticulars in their contingency (Leaman, 1985: 112).The world is not only radically particular; it is much more a realm of willthan of intellect. Thomas Aquinas had made the human intellect relativelypassive, guided by reason. He cleverly saved the doctrine of free will by arguingthat although one always acts toward what one conceives to be good, one doesnot necessarily judge things very clearly, and hence one exercises freedom ofchoice. Duns is more radical. The haecceitas of a person is, so to speak,centered on that person’s will; what ideas one has is also fundamentally amatter of one’s volition. Duns does not push this doctrine into a glorificationof irrationalism; God acts consistently and not illogically. But God did nothave to create the world out of any necessity or reason. Duns’s universe seemsrather existentialist. God is logically remote, separated by a gulf from theworld; the fundamental reality, both high and low, is volition and haecceitas,the contingent particular force of the way things happen to be.Duns Scotus indeed provided the Franciscans with a champion. But althoughhis doctrine gave rise to a movement of dedicated Scotists, counterposingthe spread of the Thomists both within the Dominican order and beyond,the intellectual outcome was unstable. Duns had again radically rearranged thecultural capital of the field; among the Franciscans themselves as well as outsidetheir ranks, the more radical implications were soon taken much further. Itappears that many thinkers jumped at the opportunity, though the credit andthe designation of leadership were given to William of Ockham. At the sametime came a reaction in the other direction, salvaging the most extreme ele-484 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsments of Neoplatonism, in the form of a purified mysticism. On this front thefame went to the Dominican Eckhart.The Breakup of Theological PhilosophyWilliam of Ockham personifies the field of Christian philosophy-cum-theologycoming apart. Although he came from within the Franciscans,12 Ockhamlumped Duns Scotus with his predecessors and antagonists—Aquinas, Bonaventure,and all the rest—into what became known as the “via antiqua.”Ockham by contrast exemplifies the “via moderna.” The Franciscans, thebiggest and strongest order, could afford the most internal diversity.There were numerous other creative positions at the turn of the century,working out the metaphysics of essence and existence, act and form, compositeand unity: Thomas Sutton, Giles of Rome, Godfrey of Fontaines, Giles ofOrleans, Hervé Nedellec, Dietrich of Freiberg, Peter John Olivi, Richard ofMiddleton, and Raymond Lull before the turn of the century; Durand of St.Pourçain, Peter Aureoli, Henry Harclay, Walter Chatton, and Eckhart shortlyafter. Most fall into the shadows beside Scotus and Ockham. There were toomany creative positions for all of them to become recognized, and theysqueezed one another out of the possibilities for propagating their ideas. Theyall worked on the same intellectual space; all had grand visions of God, Ideas,angels, forms, souls, material things, the nature of knowledge and the modesof being. They resemble the generation of 400–365 b.c.e. in Greece, with itssuperabundant energy forming new schools, most of which were fated not tosurvive. At Paris, little attention was given to the weird character RaymondLull, a kind of wandering showman with his “Great Art,” a grid of boxesgenerated by combining items from a list of fundamental elements of theuniverse. In its combinations all things of heaven and earth are contained. Thiswas both a universal metaphysics and a grand mnemonic device for dealingwith intellectual chaos. A self-educated nobleman from Majorca on the fringesof the action in Muslim Spain, Lull came from too far away at the peripheryto have more than an outsider’s sense of the intellectual world, and his devicewas ignored, though later revived in the Renaissance. In relation to the overcrowdingof the medieval attention space, Lull’s “Art” is emblematic of theactual social condition.Ockham, the most successful of the critics, worked a strategic synthesisbetween the anti-religious critics of theology and the extremists of the oppositeend, the anti-philosophical fideist theologians. He almost explicitly aimed, byeliminating superfluous metaphysical entities, to simplify what had become anextremely complicated intellectual field. Ockham’s so-called “razor” was notoriginal to him. In the previous generation a fellow Franciscan, Peter JohnAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 485Olivi, in the fray against the Aristoteleans had declared that “entities are notunnecessarily multiplied,” and argued that from the multiplicity of conceptsone cannot deduce the multiplicity of beings (EP, 1967: 5:536–537). AndOckham’s Franciscan contemporary Peter Aureoli, in the thick of debate withThomists and ambivalent toward Duns Scotus, also argued that the constitutiveelements of things are to be limited. Aureoli’s epistemology held that universalconcepts have psychological reality but no objective grounds; knowledge ofindividuals is preferable because of its clarity. Ockham represents a movementin formation, reaping the fame and putting the others in his shadow—the usualconsequence of the law of small numbers. If Ockham was especially radical,it was because he used the “razor” most ruthlessly to get rid of metaphysicalessences as well as other abstractions that had proliferated within the densenetworks of the field.Ockham’s strategic stroke is to carry out this destruction while creating anew turf on which intellectuals can work. By classifying acts of language,Ockham points the way to a new field of logic. He breaks out of the oldPorphyrian-Aristotelean hierarchy of forms and classification of syllogisms,opening up considerations of the logic of possibilities, conditionals, and otherinnovative topics. This constitutes a structural break in the organization ofintellectual life. For these topics in logic can now be pursued as specialties,whereas the Porphyrian logical hierarchy was part of an overarching metaphysicalsystem.Ockham lays down that propositions are composed of terms, and thesehave meaning only when they signify, that is, when there is an object for whichthey substitute within the proposition. Words carry three main types of representation:other words, concepts, and things. Ockham concentrates his attackon universal concepts. No one ever observes an essence; what they think theyobserve always coincides with a particular thing. Ockham asserts that a conceptis only a confused, indistinct way of referring to individuals, as a nearsightedperson looks at objects far away blurs them together; universal conceptsare merely terms which we use when we cannot pick out the actual thingwe are talking about. Accordingly God, who has perfect perception, has noideas but can see everything in its particularity. One can find here an echo ofDuns’s God, who can perceive every haecceitas.In many ways Ockham is a radicalization of Duns, but ruthlessly prunedof metaphysical abstraction. Like Duns, Ockham stresses primacy of the willbut takes it to more radical conclusions. Since there are no universal essences,nothing impedes God from making the world in any fashion at all, and nothingimpedes him from changing it by a miracle or destroying it at any moment.The moral good is good solely because it is God’s will; God could make stealingor adultery right if he willed it. Other thinkers such as Mirecourt were to press486 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsthis line of argument into what seemed almost blasphemous examples: Goddid not have to become incarnated as a man, Jesus Christ; he could just havewell chosen to be incarnated as an ass, or a stone.Ockham lets loose conservative anti-rationalism and mysticism on one side,radical empiricism on the other, and a technical logic in yet another direction.He goes along with the conservative demand to keep theology safe from theinvasions of the philosophers. The realm of theology is miraculous; Ockhamalso concludes that the order of nature must always be investigated in concretecases, since a priori reason conveys nothing, and any general principles couldbe overturned by God’s miraculous intervention. In effect, Ockham has turnedback the clock to the struggle between Abelard’s sophisticated nominalist logicand Saint Bernard’s anti-rational faith. Since the intervening generations hadbuilt up an enormous middle ground of metaphysical realism, Ockham’s revolutionconsists in combining the old enemies into a single position.The Arts Faculty and the Nominalist MovementIt is tempting to portray a “nominalist movement” springing up in rebellionagainst the metaphysical establishment, progressive thinkers unified aroundempiricism and taking many steps toward the eventual dominance of naturalscience. But William of Ockham himself has few personal pupils of significance,and his network soon peters out. Although there were henceforward many“nominalists” and even “Ockhamists,” these labels are loosely applied to arather decentralized and intellectually diverse set of thinkers. Often these areterms of abuse, bestowing unity only through the ill will of opponents.This at least gives us a clue to the structural situation. After 1300 intellectuallife was rapidly moving toward factional orthodoxy. The Dominicans hadmade Aquinas their compulsory theology in 1309; the Augustinians and theCistercians about this time also joined the Thomist camp, the latter throughthe teachings of Giles of Rome (Geyer, 1928: 549). The Franciscans in responseprohibited the reading of Aquinas in their order. Thomas Aquinas was saintedin 1323 with the support of several orders. The Franciscans were unable tohave Duns Scotus canonized despite repeated efforts, in part because of internalsplits, but a self-conscious Scotist movement grew up in rivalry to the Thomistsand zealously defended its turf in the universities (de Wulf, 1934–1947: 3:214–215).What constituted a “nominalist” opposition was the residual categoryoutside these rival orthodoxies, where free-floating innovation still went on.This category included, first of all, true “nominalists,” specialists in developingOckhamist logic. Also lumped in were a second faction, the Averroists. In theform of a “religion of reason” Averroism was not in itself forward-lookingAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 487and innovative, and its Aristoteleanism was on the other side of the dividefrom the radical metaphysics of the Ockhamists or even the Scotists. Nevertheless,Averroism flourished in a broader oppositional front, especially in theanti-papal territories of northern Italy under protection of the emperor, wherethey penetrated the university faculties of law and of medicine (see 172, 178,179, 216, 264–266 in Figures 9.4 through 9.6).13 Third, we may mentiona critical tendency in general, especially oriented toward overturning Aristoteleanismin philosophy and natural science. The most extreme of the criticalphilosophers were Mirecourt and Autrecourt, who overlapped with the Parisnetwork around Buridan specializing in natural science. A counterpart groupsexisted at Oxford, centered on the Merton College “calculators.” Here the“nominalist” label is stretched beyond the breaking point, for these criticalinnovators included anti-nominalists such as Bradwardine and Burley.What the so-called nominalist opposition had in common was a feature ofinternal university structure. We may take as emblematic the fact that Williamof Ockham never acquired a higher degree as Doctor of Theology; his radicalwork done as a Master of Arts was already enough to have him called toanswer heresy charges at Avignon, cutting off his university career. Williamfled to protection at the court of the emperor in Bavaria, where he turned towriting defenses of the secular state against the church. His companions inexile and fellow ideologists of anti-papal secularism, Jean of Jandun andMarsilius of Padua, were also arts masters, both former rectors at Paris, electedby the masters of the arts faculty. Thomists and Scotists represented theuniversity power structure oriented externally to papal politics, for whichphilosophy was subordinate to a reasoned theology. The oppositional frontconsisted of those who specialized in the subjects of the arts: logic, mathematics,natural philosophy. Although Ockham himself wrote on theology as well,he was asserting the primacy of his logical methods over the procedures of thechair-holding theologians. Most subsequent nominalists pursued their ownspecialties; this is true too of the Italian Averroists, the Parisian and Mertonianscientists, and the rest of the “opposition.” What they have in common is thattheir intellectual orientation was toward the arts faculty and its topics. Buridan,for example, apparently remained a Master of Arts his entire career (DSB,1981: 2:603). The struggle between theologians and philosophers, once socreative, now was ending in divorce.The emphasis on logic and natural science was not original to nominalism.Science, or natural philosophy, had been the common ground of virtually allphilosophical positions for generations. Most of the major philosophers hadwritten in this area: Grosseteste, Albert, Bacon, but also Bonaventure, Aquinas,Henry of Ghent, Duns Scotus, even conservatives such as Peckham (DSB,1981: 10:473–476). After 1252 the Paris arts faculty added to the trivium and488 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsFIGURE 9.6. SCHOLASTICS, MYSTICS, HUMANISTS, 1335–1465quadrivium three more required sciences, based on Aristotle’s texts in naturalphilosophy, metaphysics, and moral philosophy (CHLMP, 1982: 521–523).Logic and natural philosophy, above all Aristotle’s Physics, became the coreof the arts studies, the major subject of lectures and disputations among theyounger students and masters, and also a magnet of attention for the theologians.This wide concern with natural science continued after Duns’s death in1308. The nominalists of course were involved, but so were anti-nominalistssuch as Burley and Bradwardine, and Scotists such as Francis of Meyronnes(DSB, 1981: 5:115–116). What had shifted was that such topics were muchcloser to monopolizing the focus of philosophy, as its theological border wasbeing willfully depopulated. Intellectuals now were concentrating on the mostautonomous areas of the arts curriculum.It has been stressed (Grant, in CHLMP, 1982; Blumenberg, 1985) that thecondemnation of 1277 had paved the way for nominalism, and for the independenceof natural science from theology, by mandating that no restrictionsbe placed on the omnipotence of God. In effect, this meant the end of rationaltheology, and of theologized philosophy, leaving the two segments to go theirown ways. Nevertheless, the events of 1277 were no arbitrary turning point.The conservatives who engineered the condemnations faded away; and indeedthe positions they condemned, including both Averroism and Aquinas’s measuredAristoteleanism, remained as examples of unified rational theology-cummetaphysics.It is, rather, that the balance point of the conflicts shifted, so thatnow Aquinas became the “right wing,” the bedrock of the conservative position.Although there was a widespread Thomist faction in the 1300s, it wasconfined to minor figures (see key to Figures 9.4 and 9.5) with none of theinnovative prestige of the Scotists and especially the nominalist critics. Theextremes of the intellectual spectrum—Thomist orthodoxy at one end, Averroistheresy and anti-papalism at the other—became its static anchors; dynamismshifted to the realigning camps of the organizationally uncommitted. Itwas these contentions which carried some implications of the 1277 condemnationsto highly unorthodox results. The arbitrariness of theology vis-à-visthe world was now used to break apart the unified hierarchical cosmology thathad been shared by both old Neoplatonists and Aristoteleans. The attack onAristotle’s physics and metaphysics, itself permeated by astronomy, became theturf on which intellectual contests were now fought.The Paris Network and the Oxford CalculatorsChurch authorities in Paris by 1340 were condemning unnamed groups ofstudents and young masters who were gathering privately to read banned texts490 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathssuch as Ockham and Marsilius of Padua. Marsilius and Jean of Jandun hadbeen Paris masters from the 1310s through their exile in the mid-1320s, andin the same decade Nicolas of Autrecourt and Gregory of Rimini were students.Ockham’s Oxford opponent Walter of Burley was also present as theologymaster. Undoubtedly there was overlap among these circles, keeping up acontinuity of controversies that burst out into the extreme radicalism of Autrecourtand Mirecourt.Jean of Mirecourt, a Cistercian monk (and thus outside the main factionsof Franciscans and Dominicans) specialized in drawing out shocking consequencesof the critical movement. God could make it that the world had neverexisted. God could cause a man to hate Him, and could even have misled Christ.There is no certainty except that which is based on the principle of resistingself-contradiction. All other evidence is from experience, and only experienceof one’s own existence is certain; to doubt it is to recognize the existence ofthe doubter, thereby passing the contradiction test. Mirecourt’s argument echoesAugustine and foreshadows Descartes’s cogito, but he has none of Descartes’ssystem-founding purpose. Mirecourt instead reduces knowledge to aminimum. He would go on to conclude that between the self and externalthings, there is no ground for intermediaries; substance and accident are alikefictions.Autrecourt used a similar criterion of evidence, foreshadowing Hume,arguing that there is no line which unites cause and effect. Since substance,whether material or intellectual, involves a specific kind of causal inferenceused to explain the properties of events, substances do not exist. Autrecourtexpressly overthrew Aristotelean physics as well as metaphysics. Here we seethe anti-Aristotelean front at its most militant. Ockham in his 1317–18 Oxfordlectures had already criticized Aristotle’s physics, using his razor to dispose ofmotion as an existent over and above the moving body (CHLMP, 1982: 530).Ockham had debated with Burley’s refined realist theory that motion is asuccession of distinct forms. Autrecourt pressed this very point. Since movementand change are not the succession of different forms in the same substance,they must be a rearrangement of atoms. Nor was this atomism entirelyoriginal, as it had been proposed in the previous generation by Henryof Harclay (141 in Figure 9.4), Ockham’s close predecessor; by Gerard ofOdo, the Franciscan General (148), and by Walter Chatton (147)—that is, inthe heart of the Paris-Oxford-Avignon network (EP, 1967: 5:497–502; DSB,2:394). Autrecourt took the argument to shocking extremes, going on tospeculate that since the human soul is liberated when the atoms of the bodydisintegrate, the soul leaves and becomes reunited with another body. Autrecourtthus managed to be both a radical skeptic and a believer in reincarnation.Not surprisingly, Autrecourt was condemned and forced to burn his booksAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 491in front of the University of Paris in 1347. In the same year Mirecourt’s thesesalso were condemned. The conflictual situation generated further creativity,provoking more moderate efforts to fill the disputed space of Aristoteleanphysics. Jean Buridan, rector twice during this period, was among the universityofficials who approved the condemnations. He argued against Autrecourt’sskepticism of causality, preserving a space for the validity of scientific generalizations.Explicitly using Ockham’s logic of terms, Buridan distinguishedbetween concepts of concepts and concepts of the first degree: the latter applyto individuals and are the subject of science. Having licensed a moderatedempiricism, liberated from Aristotelean substance and teleology, Buridan andhis pupils went on to re-create the principles of physics, developing a theoryof the impetus of moving objects. Nicolas Oresme recognized the phenomenonof uniformly accelerated movement, and appears to have anticipated Descartes’smathematical representation of motion by rectangular coordinates.Albert of Saxony expounded the theory that gravity is an attraction from thecenter of earth’s mass rather than a natural propensity of objects, and appliedthe impetus theory to celestial motion. These theories overturned the Aristoteleanphysics and cosmology, eliminating the motors attached to celestialspheres, and anticipated Copernican astronomy by holding the movement ofthe earth to be possible.These philosophers were respectable; Buridan was honored and becamerich accumulating benefices. Their theses were not condemned. But neitherwere they followed. Buridan’s network stopped in the second generation anddispersed. Some moved to the new universities at Vienna and Heidelberg, butthe creativity of these lineages went no further. The moment of conflict betweenthe extremes of nominalist criticism and the now-canonical Aristoteleanismpassed, and with it the creativity of the intermediate position was forgotten.Paralleling these generations in France was the network of creative controversyat Oxford from which Scotus and Ockham had emerged. It had cosmopolitancontacts across the channel, primarily at Paris, later at Avignon and inthe south: Harclay, Chatton, Burley (191 in Figure 9.6), and Bradwardinemoved in the normal academic circles and also sometimes were emissaries orcourtiers of the English king, then involved in a series of French wars. Burleydefended the realism of universals against Ockham, and disputed the logicalstatus of time-instants in the physics of motion. Harclay and Chatton, on the“nominalist” side, put forward atomism—the position which Autrecourt wasto take to such radical extremes in Paris. Bradwardine was goaded into actionby his English compatriots to defend Aristotle’s physical continuum, showingthat it cannot be composed of indivisibles; Bradwardine used a Euclid-likeaxiomatic method to show the contradictions between non-extended points492 • Intellectual Communities: Western Paths(i.e., atoms) and geometric theorems. Under pressure from the radicals, Aristotlewas now being creatively used by the conservative camp.A group centered on Balliol and Merton colleges carried these ingredientsto more refined conclusions: William of Heytesbury (192 in Figure 9.6), RichardSwineshead (193), Richard Billingham (195), Richard Kilvington (189),John Dumbleton (196), and others. Many of them were nominalists in thestrict sense, working out technical advances based on Ockham’s logic; theyalso generalized Bradwardine’s mathematical functions for uniformly acceleratedmotion and expanded his physics. More specialized than the generationof Bradwardine, Burley, and Ockham, they stayed away from the controversiesof theology. Bradwardine in his later years did the opposite, perhaps becauseof his visits to Paris with the king, where he would have encountered theradicalism of Autrecourt’s circle. Bradwardine attacked the Ockhamists as“Pelagians” for their emphasis on free will, while he himself fell back on realistdoctrines of cause to assert God’s deterministic qualities. Oxford was no closedschool of nominalists but a network in creative tension.14 The Merton calculatorswere friends of “new thinkers” in other realms as well, such as the poetChaucer. The most famous product of the Balliol-Merton axis, at the end ofthe 1300s as the calculators had faded, was the theologian Wyclif, a Scotistand extreme realist, theological follower of Bradwardine, and inspiration forthe proto-Protestant heresy of John Hus.The Balliol-Merton calculators exemplify the concentration on the topicsof the arts curriculum which was the key to the creativity of this period. Atthe same time, this was one of the limitations on their influence. Much oftheir work was meant for disputations of advanced undergraduates, ratherthan for the purpose of making discoveries in natural philosophy (Sylla, inCHLMP, 1982: 540–563). They did not make theoretical physics independentof academic logic or philosophy, but emphasized imaginary cases as aids inpreparing for scholastic arguments. If there was no connection to empiricalresearch, neither was the connection to mathematics taken very far. Burley andKilvington rarely calculated; Bradwardine and Heytesbury typically surveyedmathematical possibilities but gave only a general indication of results. Thiswork culminated in Swineshead’s Liber Calculationum (ca. 1350), which treatsphysics problems through verbal reasoning about relationships among variablesbut contains little actual numerical analysis (DSB, 1981: 13:184–213).(Similarly among the Parisian group, Oresme’s “Cartesian coordinates” weredescribed but apparently not actually used for mathematical constructions.)This work was later admired by mathematicians such as Cardano and Leibnizfor its achievements beyond the level of the Greeks; yet the Humanists of thenext century saw in it nothing but involuted reasoning on scholastic exercisesand dismissed it as barbaric. The Oxford calculators could be recognizedAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 493retrospectively once a more broadly organized science had been created; wefind in them a calculating approach to theory, but without organized researchor a mathematical technique, and without the social supports that later upheldthese. The “calculators” had a narrower base—the interest in currently fashionabledisputes around the nominalist movement. As the intensity of thisargument faded, their creativity rather abruptly came to an end.Growth of Independent MysticismAt this time when the specialized philosophy of the arts subjects was separatingfrom theology, there was a corresponding tendency for theology to break freeof philosophy into mysticism. We must be careful to distinguish this mysticismfrom fideism, as well as from transcendentally oriented metaphysics in general.It is not helpful to refer to every assertion that faith is superior to reasoningas “mysticism,” or to make the term equivalent to “mysteries.” A religion doesnot necessarily call for mysticism as a direct experience by individuals. Thepath to what is considered “salvation” could consist entirely of scripturallyprescribed rituals; even when these are carried out not just collectively butindividually in the form of personal prayer, the internal experience does notnecessarily have to be interpreted as a direct vision of God; it could just aswell be “soul-searching” to examine one’s faith and moral commitments.Mystical experience cuts in a different direction, an immediate experience ofthe divine in which one loses self and the ordinary world, including scriptureand ritual. Mysticism tends to come in conflict with the church hierarchy andwith a ritually oriented community. For this reason, mysticism creates disciplineproblems for a centralized church, manifested on the doctrinal front inheresy disputes. Mysticism flourishes best where religion is organized by independententrepreneurs, whether these are individuals, ad hoc movements likethe Sufis, or independent monasteries of the sort found in Ch’an Buddhism.All religious rituals and symbols, however, tend to give glimpses of thiskind of direct experience, which the church organization can acknowledge andcall on for legitimation. Medieval Christianity always included some aspectsof mysticism in this sense. The emphasis on direct religious experience wasstrengthened when there was opposition to rational philosophy and academiclife. Thus Saint Bernard was sometimes regarded as a mystic, although hisemphasis on religious experience is tightly connected to moral attitudes andexercises; similarly Saint Francis remained doctrinally orthodox, and his movement—like Bernard’s, oriented toward activism more than contemplation—remainedpart of the conventional church. From here it was not much of a stepto integrate the idea of mystical experience into a fully academic philosophy.Hugh and his followers at St. Victor in the generations following Bernard494 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsadded this as a supreme stage in a progression of knowledge, and Bonaventurebuilt a metaphysical system around it. Neoplatonic philosophy, from Eriugenato Albertus Magnus, was essentially a hierarchical metaphysics with mysticalexperience as the category from which all other levels emanate. Thus mysticalelements could be integrated into either conventional scripture and ritual or apurely intellectual system; in neither case was there any necessary emphasis onthe practice of direct personal experience, on rejecting official doctrines, or onmoving outside the conventional organization of the church.After 1300, mysticism emerged in a stronger sense, becoming anti-philosophicalas well as organizationally independent. Such mysticism tends to takeitself out of the orbit of philosophy. We notice it here because there was acreative high point just when the transition occurred, for it is by the tools ofphilosophy that philosophy effaces itself. Meister Eckhart, from the lineage ofAlbert the Great and his pupil Dietrich of Freiberg, was active at Paris andCologne at the time of Scotus. Eckhart took the opposite line from Duns:existence does not apply to God as to creatures; rather God is pure essence,virtually above being. Just as Aristotle had said that the faculty of vision iswithout color in order that it may see all colors, Eckhart put it that God hasno Being, in order to cause all being (Gilson, 1944: 696). This highest essence,like the Platonic idea of the One, must be pure unity, which Eckhart regardsas the pure intelligere, Intellect. This is far above immaterial things or Forms,since these are multiple rather than one, and above material things, since theyare composites of matter and form. But there is an inner connection from thecreature to God. God is so high, so transcendent, that one can say nothingabout his divine unity; a creature is so low that it is also nothing, so to speak,nothing in itself. Thus the citadel of the soul contains a divine “spark,”whereby the human being is no longer distinguished from God. From this sparkthere is a Plotinus-like flow backwards from the creature to God, a return intothe One.Eckhart does not seem to have been a meditative mystic, but he arguedhimself into a mystical position by the logic of oppositions within the intellectualfield. As we have seen in the origins of Buddhism, meditative experiencein itself is susceptible to interpretation in all sorts of ways; the specificallymystical interpretation always depends on a heritage of philosophical ideas.Thus it is not surprising that the real meditative mystics of the later MiddleAges began directly from this network. Tauler and Suso, although they werepreachers and not professors, were pupils (certain or likely) of Eckhart and ofthe other followers of Albert at Cologne (210 and 211 in Figure 9.6). But themysticism now established as a tradition broke free from the universities. Thesewere not academic theologians, and indeed they tended to come into conflictwith official theology because of their independence. Structurally as well asAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 495doctrinally the mystics become the negative counterpart of the nominalistsbased in the most insulated academic faculty of the universities.The most influential mystics established their own lines of organization.Jan van Ruysbroeck, a preacher without formal training in theology, and ofimperfect Latin, was influenced by Eckhart’s writings and established a devotionalcommunity in Holland in 1343. His colleague Gerard Groote later inthe century organized the Brethren of the Common Life. Although its raisond’être was devotions, it became a house of studies turning out some famouspupils: Thomas à Kempis, whose Imitation of Christ, circulated from 1422 bythe copyists of the Brethren, was the most popular devotional book of theperiod; then in successive generations a series of notable scholars, includingCusanus, the nominalist systematizer Biel (300 in the key to Figure 9.7), andErasmus. The period was also rich in practicing mystics of a non-intellectualtype (e.g., 168, 184a, 269, 270, 288); some of these became saints throughtheir devotions, from Saint Catherine of Siena (229), down through the asceticreformer Saint Teresa of Avila and her circle in the late 1500s.Notice a parallel in Islamic intellectual life. After the creative philosophicalnetworks disintegrated (after al-Ghazali in the east, Ibn Rushd in Spain),activity was increasingly dominated by Sufi mystics. Ibn ÀArabi, who emergeddirectly from Ibn Rushd’s orbit, was the most systematic combination ofmysticism and philosophy, a parallel to Eckhart at the point of transition. Thereis an organizational reason for this parallel development: mysticism thrives ondecentralization. Jewish philosophy provides a confirming instance.The networks of Jewish rationalistic philosophy in Spain had peaked duringtheir overlap with Islamic and Christian networks. In the late 1100s thiscosmopolitan network broke up as the political situation polarized betweenthe fundamentalist Almohad invasion from North Africa, then the Christianreconquest. Religious particularism and intolerance intensified. Jewish cosmopolitansmigrated north and were absorbed into the movements of their Christiancounterparts. Within the Talmudic academies, Maimonides’s Aristoteleanismwas repudiated in favor of defending the distinctness of Judaism againstChristianity. Doctrines were revived from the period of Jewish Gnosticism,interpreting traditional texts as esoteric symbols of cosmic correspondencesand prophecies (Scholem, 1946, 1990). In Provence and Catalonia, spanningthe Pyrenees, regions of the Catharist movement and Christian heresy-hunting,a network of rabbinical scholars in the late 1100s began to produce Kabbalisttexts. These were successors to the network propagated most widely in Spain,a region of growing religious persecution. The Neoplatonism of the cosmopolitantrans-religious period gave way to an esoteric defense of Judaism. Inthe late 1200s the most popular texts of the Kabbalah appeared, interpretingprophecy as a mystical union with God, and teaching breathing techniques to496 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsinduce the experience (Scholem, 1946: 139, 203). The Zohar was written tocombat the rationalism of educated Jews; its watchword is “back to theTorah,” interpreted as a secret code; meditative ecstasy for the elect is broadenedinto a theosophy for the Jewish masses (see Figure 9.5).In the context of increasing ghettoization and persecution of the Jews,mysticism shifted from personal experience toward political and sometimesapocalyptic prophecy. In this respect Jewish mysticism was closer to Islamicmystical orders, which frequently took on a political motivation, whereas thegreater organizational strength of the Christian Church kept its mysticismcentered on private devotions, watchfully guarded against heretical implications.After 1400, as the strength of the papacy eroded and then was openlychallenged by the Reformation, Christian mystics too became increasinglypoliticized. The Kabbalism which had become widespread among ordinaryJews was now used as a cultural resource by cosmopolitan Christian intellectualsin mobilizing their projects for a new political-religious order.Intellectuals as Courtiers: The HumanistsThe prominence of mysticism in the later Middle Ages was one of severaldirections of intellectual dispersion. There also appeared a new brand ofintellectuals. Some were laymen rather than clergy, or remained in the ambivalentstanding of the minor grades without consecration as priests. They wrotein the vernacular tongues and in a Latin which they took from the manuscriptsof Roman times, and which they held superior to the “barbarisms” ofthe university scholastics. These “Humanists” had a different cultural capitaland a different organizational base; they were court nobility or administrators,in the service of the secular rulers. In Italy, as the papacy disintegratedinto a minor feudal power, its patronage style came to match that of thelocal aristocrats. In the 1400s there were humanist cardinals and even popestaking part in a common round of status display with this non-scholasticculture. Courtiers had existed before, but they had never been able to competewith the university teachers and the church theologians as the center of intellectuallife.From now on scholastic and humanist styles were typically rooted indifferent careers. Thomists, Scotists, and nominalists continued to be universityprofessors, especially in the old strongholds of theology and in the universitieswhich emulated them in Germany and Spain. The Italian universities hadpreviously stood apart from the theological philosophy of the scholastics; nowthey became home to two other factions of professors: the Averroists (e.g., Paulof Venice, Vernias, Achillini, and Nifo at Padua and Bologna; see 264 in Figure9.6 and 306, 307, 326 in Figure 9.7) and the Aristoteleans (Pomponazzi, Bar-Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 497FIGURE 9.7. REFORMERS, METAPHYSICIANS, SKEPTICS, 1465–1600498 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsbaro, 305, Zabarella, 352), who base themselves on original Greek texts andancient commentators such as Alexander of Aphrodisias. (Hence the name“Alexandrians” for opponents of the Averroist interpretation of Aristotle.)The Humanists, by contrast, usually had careers as courtiers or churchpoliticians. Some of them were Greeks, fleeing the collapsing Byzantine Empire:Chrysoloras, Pletho, Bessarion, Trebizond, Argyropoulos (231, 261, 274, 273,287). After them came their pupils and followers: Valla, Piccolomini, Cusanus,Ficino, Pico della Mirandola, Reuchlin. There were a few professional academicsamong them, notably Vittorino da Feltre and Guarino di Verona (263, 262),but outside the older philosophy-theology positions. They acquired new chairsin Greek or the classics at the northern Italian universities, or established newschools: Da Feltre created a private school for children; Ficino was made headof the Platonic Academy at Florence by Cosimo di Medici. In the next centuryPeter Ramus was given a chair for his anti-scholastic logic at the new CollègeRoyale at Paris; his method spread not so much in the universities as in thesecondary schools springing up as a form of alternative education. The mostfamous humanists often had mixed careers—part courtier, part teacher ofclassics. They were above all textual scholars, editors, and translators. Theirlinks to court circles gave an emphasis to literature and history from the Greekand Roman classics, items of lay culture rather than abstract philosophy. Byaround 1500, when the Humanist program was established in the northernuniversities, it was centered on the arts course aimed at producing “the graduatedestined for a civic or legal career (the articulate civil servant)” (Jardine,1983: 253). When philosophy was brought in, it tended to involve a lay appealthrough occultism (pushed by Reuchlin, Agrippa of Nettesheim, Paracelsus,Bruno, all of whom had mixed careers in and out of academic circles), orthrough claims that ancient texts are the higher basis of religion, as in theambiguous Platonism—part paganism, part esoteric Christianity—of Plethoand Ficino.The humanists were most fruitful for philosophy where their networkscombined with the leading intellectual factions of the church. Nicolas Cusanusowed his eminence to contacts which put together most of the sources ofcultural capital of the early and mid-1400s. He studied at the leading centerof mysticism, the school of the Brethren of Common Life while Thomas àKempis was active; then philosophy in the nominalist stronghold, Heidelberg;canon law at Padua, where he also heard lectures of the preeminent Humanistsand made his Humanist reputation by recovering Latin literary texts. Hisconnections brought him into the center of church politics. He was active atthe Council of Basel in 1431 on the side favoring shared rule of the church.When the conciliar faction proved unable to organize itself, Cusanus switchedsides. Diplomatic service with the papacy took him to Constantinople and fur-Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 499ther contacts with the cosmopolitan importers of Greek texts. Cusanus kneweverybody: the north German mystic Denis the Carthusian (268 in Figure 9.6);the humanist Piccolomini, a key patron as papal secretary and then pope;Pletho, the paganizing Byzantine scholar who influenced Cosimo di Medici tofound the Platonic Academy in Florence; the anti-scholastic philologist LorenzoValla. Later Cusanus corresponded with the young German scholars Peurbachand Regiomontanus, subsequently the leading mathematicians of the century.Cusanus’s great work, On Learned Ignorance (1440), was the precipitateof these contacts. Here he defends the reality of universal Forms, freeingPlatonism from its connection to the Aristotelean cosmology of nested spheres.Developing the mathematical notion of infinity, Cusanus arrives at the coincidenceof opposites: all geometrical shapes merge when enlarged to an infinitescale; applied to cosmology, this means that the universe is a sphere whoseperiphery is nowhere and its center, accordingly, is everywhere. The universeis no longer hierarchical but decentered. In part this is a philosophical expressionof the mystical vision, but also of the implications of nominalism; allultimates are paradoxical, and man at best can only become aware of his ownlimits, which is his own transcendent nothingness. Cusanus was the onlyoutstandingly creative philosopher during several generations. The scholasticswere stalled in their factionalism; the mystics had largely abandoned abstractdiscourse; the Humanists were engrossed in reviving the classic texts of antiquity.Cusanus was the individual in whom these opposing negations intersected;in him the coincidence of opposites flared up briefly into a vivid and idiosyncraticvision.The bases of intellectual life continued to decentralize still further. Universities,once centered in France and England, now proliferated, especially inGermany. The most sustained network of successful Humanists were thereligious politicians who constituted the intellectual core of the Reformation.Martin Luther was a biblical professor at Wittenberg, a newly founded universityon the eastern frontier of Germany; his colleague and collaboratorPhilipp Melancthon was a protégé of Reuchlin. Humanist skill with classictexts was turned to the politically explosive issues of biblical scholarship andto throwing off medieval accretions of scholastic theology and canon law.Colet, Erasmus, Agrippa, Vives, and Paracelsus are linked in another network,based in typical Humanist careers: partly courtiers under political patronage,partly university professors of theology, Greek, and even Kabbalism.15 Butthe Reformation was radically decentralizing and these networks, marginallyphilosophical at best, lead no further in abstract philosophy.In the chaos of lay-oriented positions at the end of the 1500s, two characteristicstyles are represented by Bruno and Montaigne. Like the occultists andProtestant sect leaders before him, Bruno was a feverish entrepreneur in anunsettled religious and intellectual situation. He abandoned the Dominican500 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsconvent in Naples and wandered from court to court—from Geneva to Paris,from London to Germany to Venice—denouncing the university scholars andseeking patrons for his scheme to replace the warring sects of disunited Christendom.For him, religion and philosophy had metamorphosed into an eclecticmix of pagan hermeticism, Jewish Kabbalah, magical symbolism, and newscience. Bruno was full of the boldness of new combinations, but insulationfrom politics was lacking, and he was burned for heresy.The aristocrat Montaigne took a more cautious path. Montaigne’s interestin allaying doctrinal conflicts was stimulated by the diverse religious ties of hisfamily and political connections. Through his mother he was related to PortugueseJews, forced converts to Catholicism, who had settled in Bordeaux; hisdistant cousin Francisco Sanchez, from this same mixed religious background,attended the same college in Bordeaux, and developed an anti-scholastic skepticismabout the same time as Montaigne. In the 1570s, just when he waswriting his Apologie de Raymond Sebond and beginning his Essais, Montaignewas active in mediating between the Catholic Royalists and the French Protestantleader, Henry of Navarre, whose conversion to Catholicism and ascensionto the French throne Montaigne finally negotiated in 1588.16 Montaigne’screative energy was no doubt multiplied by the successful trajectory of hispolitical connections; it also helps explain why he became far more famousthan Sanchez. Montaigne sought to mediate religious strife by a classicallytinged skepticism, expressed with a literary touch. His philosophy makes lightof doctrinal conflicts as well as the claims of Copernicus and Paracelsus tohave produced a new science. Montaigne’s “plague on all houses” representsthe culminating skepticism in an age when the bases of intellectual life werefragmented and in flux.Medieval Christendom was built on the monasteries, the papacy, and theuniversities. By now the first two had crumbled, and the third had becomeunfocused and scattered.The Question of Intellectual StagnationStudies of intellectual life have preferred to focus on periods of creativity. Yetwe recognize what is creative only by contrast. Comparison of the dark sideagainst the light, and against the gray in between, is necessary for seeing thestructural conditions associated with all of the varieties of intellectual life. Asecond reason to study stagnation is perhaps of greater immediate significance.There is no guarantee that we ourselves—denizens of the late twentieth century—inhabit a period of creativity. There is some likelihood that futureintellectual historians looking back will concentrate on the great ideas of thefirst third of the century, and regard the rest as a falling off into mediocrity.Almost all subsequent periods regarded late medieval philosophy as aAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 501period of stagnation. The Renaissance, especially the Italian intellectuals of thelate 1400s and 1500s, viewed the preceding period as barbaric and pointed tothe universities of their own times as exemplars of its most decadent phase. Bythe late 1300s, scholastic thinkers themselves felt that their own intellectualculture was dead. In 1402 Jean Gerson, the last important philosopher at theUniversity of Paris for over 100 years, condemned the rationalist philosophyof his predecessors (Gilson, 1944: 716). Echoing both nominalist and fideistthemes, he declared that intellectuals engage in arbitrary and absurd speculation;they follow pagan philosophy instead of penitence, humility, and faith;their overestimation of reason is the source of heresies, like those whichproceeded from the realist Bradwardine to Wyclif and Hus. Gerson’s contemporaryPeter of Candia, who became pope in 1409, observed the factional warsof his time as ones which no one expected to have any resolution (Gilson,1944: 615). He considered various opinions, not citing them as authorities forarguments in the manner of the scholastics, but with detachment like that ofan intellectual of our own time who falls back from participation into historiography.This sounds not unlike the “end of philosophy” themes and thedisparagement of “foundationalism” of present-day intellectuals. We thus findanother reason to be interested in the social causes of stagnation: the suspicionthat we might be in a similar situation today.Stagnation is not a simple condition; there are at least three kinds.Stagnation (A): Loss of cultural capital. Ideas may simply be forgotten as laterintellectuals are unable to do what earlier ones could. Aristotle’s doctrine waslost for several centuries after his death; the achievements of Stoic logic wereforgotten by late antiquity, Megarian logic even sooner. In India after the1600s, the acute metaphysics of the previous periods was swallowed up in asimplified Advaita Vedanta. In China the sophisticated positions of the lateWarring States period, especially Mohist logic and its rivals, were largelyeclipsed by the religious Confucianism of the Han dynasty. In the late T’ang,the metaphysical subtleties of the Consciousness-Only philosophy, as well asmost other schools, were lost among the Buddhists. And to leave philosophyfor an area in which technical criteria of puzzle-solving are especially clear, thebreakthrough into generalized and explicit algebraic methods achieved duringthe Sung and Yuan dynasties (ca. 1050–1300) was lost in the Ming (1366–1644), so that later mathematicians could no longer understand the earliertexts (Qian, 1985: 69–70; Ho, 1985: 106; Needham, 1959: 38–145; Mikami,1913: 110). The loss of ideas makes us think of a Dark Age, brought aboutby destruction of material conditions of civilization, such as the decline ofRome in the West. But these examples show that idea loss can also happenduring prosperous periods of high civilizations; indeed, the loss of Greekculture had started in Rome long before the barbarian conquests.502 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsStagnation (B): Dominance of the classics. An opposite form of stagnationoccurs when the ideas of the greatest thinkers overshadow those of theirsuccessors. There is no new creativity, which necessarily would displace theold. Such a period should not be called a low level of culture; one might saythat it stays at the peak: the ideas that are taught and circulated are the bestyet achieved. It is an irony of the intellectual world that we are not satisfiedwith this. We admire creativity, but when great creativity gets its rewards, wesoon regard it as stagnation. There are two sides to creativity: the energy ofcreation and the visions it produces. In the long run each undermines the other.Since creativity is driven by chains of eminence, some earlier figures are boundto be overshadowed by their successors. The greatest rewards tend to go tothose who are last in a dense and competitively balanced chain. This is whyHegel could say, “The owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the fallingof dusk.” Stagnation as well as creativity is at the heart of the network structureof intellectual life.Historical comparisons show that there is nothing automatic about thisenshrinement of the classics. In India, where the ideology strongly favored immutablewisdom from the past, there were long periods of change in both Buddhistand Hindu camps. Greek philosophy, too, tended to forget earlier doctrinesrather than to repeat them; when it thought it was reiterating Pythagorasor Plato, it often was grafting new doctrines onto them. In China the enshrinementof Confucius, Lao Tzu, and the ancient divination texts nevertheless wentalong with periods when there was considerable innovation disguised as commentarieson these texts. There is a tradeoff between Stagnation (A) andStagnation (B). More precisely, at least one way in which old cultural capitalis lost is through creative reinterpretation of it (although there are moreextreme forms of forgetting, and other versions of creativity). A civilizationmay have episodes of either kind of stagnation. In China, after Chu Hsi hadformulated his grand synthesis around 1200, Ch’eng-Chu Neo-Confucianismacquired a stranglehold on Chinese intellectual life for over 300 years; to putthe matter in a different light, Chinese intellectuals could rest serenely inenjoying the great philosophy that already existed.Late Christendom exemplifies Stagnation (B) more than Stagnation (A). Theachievements of Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus towered over constructivephilosophy, just as Ockham did on the critical side. The late medieval scholasticsenshrined an extremely high level of creativity; yet its very solidity eventuallyprovoked an attack from advocates of intellectual movement. The textbooksof the 1500s and 1600s, especially those of the Spanish and Frenchuniversities of the Counterreformation, came to represent sterility in the eyesof Francis Bacon and Descartes. One could also say that the Renaissance,which coincided with this stagnant period of medieval philosophy, providesonly a rival stagnation of the same type in its adulation of the ancient classics.Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 503Stagnation (C): Technical refinement. A third type of stagnation may indeedbe not stagnation at all but only the appearance of such. Intellectual life doesnot stop in its tracks, but its very progress breeds not respect but alienation.A common claim about late medieval philosophy has been that the field hadgotten too technical, overrefined, spinning angels dancing in conceptual air.Duns Scotus was aptly called “Doctor Subtilis,” the Subtle Doctor. The RenaissanceHumanists were particularly put out by Duns’s style, both his neologismsin metaphysics (certainly not known in the days of Cicero!) and the longtortuous sentences with clause after clause of careful qualification. This is morethan emblematic of the time. The writing of a centrally located philosopher isa precipitate of the energies and concepts built up by the intellectual community.Duns’s abstractions and distinctions, his complicated and rarefied worldview,and his patient tenacious threads of argument are the embodiment of theconflicting factions of philosophers who had been realigning for three intensegenerations, and driving up the level of abstraction and subtlety at every step.The Scotists did not stop in their tracks after the death of the master; theycontinued to defend and elaborate, now attempting alliances with nominalists,sometimes making anti-nominalist coalition by playing down their differenceswith the Thomists. But the excitement of new synthesis did not appear. Thenominalists, loosely designated, were often very creative, by the standards ofmodern analytical philosophy.17 But they were now specialized in logic or othertechnical subjects. Their work provided no strong focus for the intellectualfield, no vortices of emotional energy. The technical innovations did notpropagate very widely; they were no challenge to the image of the overpoweringmasters, no visible alternative to Stagnation (B). And in time, because suchcreativity does not attract followers, it cannot reproduce itself; it dries up, andthe situation begins indeed to approach Stagnation (A).18 By the time of theRenaissance, beginning in the 1400s in circles far outside the university worldwhich had sustained medieval intellectual life, there was genuine loss of ideas,ignorance of what medieval philosophy was about. Duns Scotus, the SubtleDoctor, was on his way to being caricatured as the “Dunce,” the stupid pupilforced to sit in the corner wearing a “dunce cap.”Reversal of the External ConditionsHow does stagnation happen? In principle, the conditions should be theobverse of those for creativity. If intellectuals are allowed to form a community,they automatically tend to develop issues and divide the attention space amongfactions. Creativity is the energy that builds up as this process continues overseveral generations of personal contacts within the network. External conditionsdetermine when such a network structure comes into existence and how504 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathslong it will last. The crucial conditions for creativity are those which sustainmultiple bases of intellectual conflict across a primary focus of attention.Creativity depends on a center, crisscrossed by material resources that canuphold opposing factions; a small number of centers linked by intermobilityof their participants can provide this necessary intermeshing of focus andconflict.As long as this structural shape continues to exist, external conditions mayintervene by destroying, prohibiting, or promoting a particular faction. Thisin itself does not damage the creativity of the whole network, as it mayrearrange intellectual space and set the occasion for new internal alignments.Upheavals in the external bases of factions, destructive as they may be to thepeople within them, are not a bad thing for intellectual life as a whole, providedthat the overall structure still contains multiple factions and a common focusof attention. Surrounding social conflict, organization-building, and destruction—the rise and fall of schools and states, of religious factions and ordersof monks, of the papacy or the caliphate—will in fact promote creativity bycausing the realignment of factions. Creativity comes to an end when externalconditions either end the bases for multiple factions or eliminate the commoncenter.Let us briefly survey the overall structure of the intellectual world in thecreative and non-creative periods of philosophy.Greece. In the pre-Socratic period, creativity was centered at first in a networkof cities on the Ionian coast, with Miletos at the core. Then the networkmigrated to a number of colonies in southern Italy and Sicily, where the maininstitutional continuity was provided by the Pythagorean brotherhood; anotherbranch dispersed around the Aegean, to Abdera in the north as well as themedical schools at Cos and Cnidus in the southeast. It is possible that creativitywould have dissipated, but geopolitical events now provided a center. ThePersian conquest of Ionia and the Greek coalition and counterattack fosteredmigration, as did the democratic revolutions and the upsurge of tyrants;refugees and ambassadors formed the milieu for a cosmopolitan intellectualnetwork which came to center on the imperialist power at Athens. The metropoliswas just that: a center of intellectual attraction, filled almost entirelywith foreigners. Socrates and Plato were virtually the only Athenians amongthe important intellectuals of their city for hundreds of years; Aristotle, Diogenes,Epicurus, Zeno, and others came from the remote provinces. Thesituation is similar to that of medieval Paris during its great generations of the1200s, when there was scarcely a Frenchman among the leading masters.For a couple of generations, Athens was flanked by peripheral nodes atMegara, Elis, Cyrene, Cyzicus, and elsewhere. These were specialized homesAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 505of particular schools, and almost all connected to the networks of the center.Originally independent schools such as those of Abdera, Lampsacus, andMytilene achieved their fortune when they finally established their school inAthens, like that which made the Epicureans famous. The center provided afocus of attention and the opportunity for the meshing of networks. Creativityis sustained when there are multiple bases for contending factions. Athens atits height was cross-cut by a variety of schools, anchored in external differencesin political support, religious orientation, and lifestyle radicalism. Shifts inthese external bases provided the ultimate forces that drove internal realignmentsin carving up intellectual space.In the Hellenistic period, the external bases narrowed. Most of the peripheralnodes dropped out (see Figure 3.3); the rival schools by and large werenow based only in Athens, displacing those with an independent center ofsupport. There was one other center of intersecting circles: Alexandria absorbedthe medical schools from Cos and Cnidus, as well as Peripatetics andStoics from Athens. For a century there was a balanced situation of creativitybetween the rivals, down to the generation of Chrysippus or Carneades. Withthe growing hegemony of Rome and the political collapse of Athens, by around100 b.c.e. the material bases provided by the Athenian schools had disappeared.Intellectual centers migrated away, to Pergamum, Rhodes, Naples; buteach of these fostered a single school, not a cosmopolitan center, and nonesurvived more than a generation or two. Alexandria still functioned institutionally,but too much alone to sustain much creativity. Philosophy becamelargely absorbed by the practice of rhetoric, an occupation of municipal lawyersand wandering speech makers, a base which provided neither centralizationnor insulation for intellectuals to pursue autonomous concerns.The coming of Christianity and other popular religious movements furtherdecentralized the intellectual world. The Gnostic sects were small and organizationallydispersed; the Christian church was more hierarchical, but its baseswere geographically far-flung and dependent on regional political fortunes. Themost creative period was marked by the balance of rivalry when Christiansentered the philosophical schools at Alexandria, provoking the great pagansynthesis of Plotinus and his followers. But both Christian philosophers andPlotinine pagans migrated away to the centers of political patronage, respectivelyto Syria and to Rome, from whence the networks soon further dispersed.By late antiquity, Athens and Alexandria had become not centers of intersectingfactions but local strongholds of a particular faction. Elsewhere religiousintellectuals were active at Constantinople, Pergamum, Antioch, Milan,Carthage. Centralization was lost first, leading to the defocusing of intellectuallife, the general loss of abstraction, and the predominance of particularistic506 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathstheology and magic. Later the material bases for multiple factions were drasticallycurtailed with the general material decline of the empire; accumulatedcultural capital was then largely forgotten.China. In the early creative period of the Warring States, intellectuals circulatedamong the Chi-hsia Academy and the courts at Wei, P’ing-yuan, andCh’in. The greatest of these were centers of intersecting circles. Political andprestige rivalry between the major courts was overlaid by the autonomousorganizational movements of Confucians and Mohists; these conditions fostereda third party of unaffiliated intellectuals who carved out a variety ofpositions across the turf provided by a focus on the life of debate. Again inthe great period of Buddhist creativity, there was competition among severalorganized factions intersecting physically at a few places: the capital of thepro-Buddhist dynasties, especially the T’ang, with its court and great monasteries,counterbalanced by the great intersectarian monasteries at T’ien-tai,Lu-shan, and Shao-lin ssu. A later period of creativity in the Sung was basedon intellectual exchange among factions centered on the two northern capitals,Loyang (the old capital and cultural center for out-of-office officials) andCh’ang-an, where the ups and downs of Wang An-Shih’s reform movementwere taking place. Here was a multiple meshing among political-literary factionsof the gentry, reforming and traditionalist officials of the examinationsystem, and the quasi-religious schools of the Neo-Confucians and occultists.In the Southern Sung there were again interconnected rival centers: Chu Hsi’sacademy, which was the most successful of the private schools living off andsimultaneously opposing the examination system; and the professors of thenational university such as Liu Chiu-Yuan.The stagnant periods of Chinese intellectual life were either dominated bya single center or drastically dispersed. The huge but uncreative nationaluniversity of the Han, reaching 30,000 students at its height, exemplifies theformer. We see the dispersion and loss of focus in the later period of Ch’anBuddhism, when its monasteries proliferated in rural China but interconnectionsamong its lineages faded away; it was then that Ch’an creativity gaveway to its own version of scholasticism, making koans out of the exploits ofits earlier leaders. The huge development of the material conditions of educationin the Ming shows dispersion without creative focus. There were hundredsof thousands of students in small scattered schools, supporting an industry ofprinted books (Chaffee, 1985). The national university and the mass gatheringsfor the provincial and metropolitan examinations did not stimulate the debateof philosophical factions, but only encouraged the individual pursuit of scholasticforms.Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 507India. The creative periods in philosophy occurred when the networks weregeographically most concentrated. The Upanishadic sages were in the middleGanges, notably at Banares. In this region the rival consolidating states, Magadhaand Kosala, were the locations where the rival networks of debatingascetics built up, culminating in the organizations of Buddhists, Jainas, andAjivikas. The literary creativity of the Hindu “renaissance,” by contrast, camein dispersion, the epics assembled by pioneers migrating away from the Gangesheartland. The apex of abstract philosophy occurred in the generations whenHindu and Buddhist networks meshed and debated, above all at Nalanda, theheadquarters monastery in old Magadha which became an intersectarian center,cosmopolitan and virtually secularized as a modern university. Flankingthis Buddhist center were a few others monastery-universities, in wealthyGujarat in the west, and downriver in Bengal. On the Hindu side, Banaresbecame an intellectual center again at the time of Shankara, drawing Hindustudents from the south.As Buddhism disappeared from India, Hindu monastic orders took itsplace, expanding and splitting into rival movements. Educational organizations(maths), were created teaching the doctrine of each sect. For a time abstractphilosophy continued to develop; this was concentrated at the moments whensplits occurred, leaders of new factions such as Ramanuja and Madhva branchingoff from the older networks and developing new philosophical standpointsto go along with the particulars of their theology and the independence of theirorganization. Some creativity flared up where the older schools of the establisheddarshanas intersected the new religious movements, as in Kashmirduring 800–1000, where the tail end of a longstanding Buddhist lineage amalgamatedwith the Nyaya logicians and entered debate with Shaiva sectarians,resulting in a unique brand of Shaivaite energy ontology. Another center wasin the old central region of the middle Ganges, where the Nyaya school—thelast holdout from the pre-sectarian schools of Hinduism—maintained a headquartersat Mithila (very near Nalanda), and where the technicalities of Neo-Nyaya were created, a last gasp of innovation from 1350 to about 1500. Themaths became increasingly sectarian after about 1300, immersed in articulatingtheir own position; formal education proliferated around India, but there wereno great central places where debates were focused. Indian philosophy dissipatedin scholastic handbooks and eclectic syncretisms, flanked by populardevotional cults outside the ranks of the professional scholars. The materialbases of schooling were more abundant than ever at just the time whenphilosophy dried up.Japan. During the Buddhist period, virtually all of the important new developmentsspun off from the great monastery complex at Mount Hiei overlook-508 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsing Kyoto; the several Zen movements were an intersection between MountHiei and Chinese lineages contacted by Japanese sojourners. The creativemoments happened when former Mount Hiei pupils established their newbases during the initial process of splitting from the center. As Zen and PureLand temples proliferated and dispersed, the focus of intellectual life was lost.The elite Zen temples of Kyoto became centers for new movements in the arts;but aesthetics replaced religious doctrine and its associated philosophies. Inthis situation the expansion of formal education did not help. A single “university”under the Ashikaga shoguns had thousands of students, but thecurriculum, Neo-Confucian philosophy and other classic texts imported fromChina, stagnated. The Soto temples spread elementary schooling in the countryside.Although their founder, Dogen, was the greatest of the Zen philosophers,after his death advanced studies turned into formalistic summaries andcommentaries. The Rinzai temples maintained the tradition of Chinese koancollections. These too turned to scholasticism, most elaborately in the earlyTokugawa, when the temples were absorbed under government bureaucraticregulation; solving a lengthy sequence of koan became the requirement forgaining enlightenment certificates, a pursuit of credentials entitling their holdersto office as abbots.Buddhist intellectual and spiritual life was demoralized through its owncareerism and material success. Under the Tokugawa regime, philosophy tookoff again in new culture-producing institutions: the private proprietary schoolsfor samurai, most of them at Kyoto, with a few at Edo. The division of culturallife between the old and the new de facto capitals fostered a salutary competition,while the number of schools remained relatively low. Helping focus thecompetition of intersecting circles were the two great patronage centers sponsoredby the shogun’s relatives, the lords of Mito and Aizu. Cross-breeding ofnetworks led to a series of vigorous new schools, including a merchant academyat Osaka, which went on to produce the most radical secularists andnaturalists. Creativity was limited to the non-official marketplace of privateschools; the training schools established by the daimyo for the higher officialsin their feudal domains were no more than a formalistic drill. From the late1700s onward many new schools were founded at all levels; but the growthof mass education went along with intellectual stagnation. The attempt in the1790s to establish a Chinese-style examination system did little more than addto the formalization of rote learning.In general, it was those types of schools which were newest, and stillconfined to a small number of places, which were intellectually creative. Themovement of National Learning in the mid- and late 1700s, and the Osakamerchant academy with its few spin-offs into schools of Dutch Learning, werea limited set of institutions but with much more intellectual action than theAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 509Neo-Confucian samurai schools, Buddhist schools, and daimyo schools whichbecame so widely available around 1800. When the European university wasimported, the pattern repeats: the early generations, when there are only a fewkey centers, is the time of greatest creativity in philosophy.Stagnation and Loss of a Center in IslamIn Islam and Christendom, philosophy follows a similar pattern: conditionsfor rising creativity are followed by those of stagnation. As we have noted, thedifferences between the two regions were matters of degree, although theywould accumulate into differences in substance.In the earliest period of the Islamic Empire, the principal centers of philosophywere dispersed: Jundishapur in southwestern Persia, where the paganschool of Athens had moved after being closed down in 529; Antioch, inheritorof the Alexandrian school after 718, before it moved on around 850 to Harranin northern Syria, where a school of Sabian star worshippers also existed; andthe Nestorian school at Nisibis in Syria (Nakosteen, 1964: 16–19; Watt, 1985:37–39; see map in Chapter 8). These preserved the ancient cultural capital butwere not known for innovation. It was only when their scholars becamegathered in Baghdad, at the caliph’s translation project and under other patrons,that the creative network density was achieved. During the great creativeperiod of Islamic life from 800 to 1000, virtually all the intellectuals were atBaghdad and at the port city Basra 300 miles down the Euphrates. It was aclose network, with much movement between the two places.Baghdad and Basra provided the creative combination of a central focus ofattention together with multiple bases of intellectual factions. These basesincluded the court as well as other aristocratic patrons supporting groupsengaged in collecting libraries, translating foreign texts, and maintaining charitablehospitals where medicine was taught together with related Greek learning.On the side of the “ancient learning,” there were rival groups of translators:the Jundishapur lineage exemplified by Hunayn, now at the House ofWisdom, as well as star worshippers from Harran, such as the family of Thabitibn Qurra. Nestorian Christians, Sabians, Zoroastrians, and Hindus crossedat this center under Muslim sponsorship; the first great Muslim philosophers,al-Kindi and al-Farabi, were at the center of these networks at Baghdad. Basrawas the initial center of philosophical creativity on the side of the “Islamicsciences”; its mosque was where the rational theologians, including the MuÀtazilitesand AshÀarites, were formed, and Basra was the home base of the secretsociety of the Pure Brethren. These networks also had branches in Baghdad,in the orbit of Greek falsafa. The early Sufis, too, though they were a dispersedcollection of wanderers, made their greatest impact at Baghdad; this was the510 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathssite of their most famous early representatives, al-Bistami, al-Junayd, andal-Hallaj.The other important ingredient in the intellectual scene is the lineages ofthe teachers of jurisprudence (legal “schools” in a metaphorical but not institutionalsense). Initially these were regionally based: Malik and his followersat Medina; al-ShafiÀi in Egypt; Abu Hanifa at Kufa and Baghdad; yet otherstyles of interpretation in Syria, Persia, and elsewhere (Lapidus, 1988: 164–165). There was a huge proliferation of such legal sects; it is estimated that byaround 800 c.e. there were some 500 of them (Makdisi, 1981: 9). By around900 to 1000, some four or five schools took the lead; by the 1100s, acceptanceof one of four schools had become the criterion of orthodoxy as a Muslim.The law schools were by and large a decentralizing agent, even when they hadbeen winnowed to a few lineages. In the creative period of philosophy, it wasthe Hanbalis who were most active as a scriptural, anti-rationalist opposition.This traditionalist lineage was centered originally at Baghdad, in most immediatecontact with the rational theologians.A nucleus for these competing factions existed at Baghdad with an outlierat Basra. The sometimes violent conflicts among these groups did not threatenthe overall structure as long as the general conditions remained intact. But asthe Baghdad caliphate lost its political power, its importance as a patron ofintellectual life declined, and the central focus where networks might confrontone another began to disappear. For a time Nishapur, in eastern Persiafar beyond the Caspian Sea (two months’ journey from Baghdad), becameimportant, but mainly in theological studies; it was the chief AshÀarite centerfrom 900 until about 1100. For a while some network connection was maintainedbetween it and Baghdad; al-Ghazali, as well as some of his teachers,was active in both places. Intellectual life was now dispersing; after 1100 evenNishapur no longer maintained any central focus for the theologians, who werefound now in Isfahan, Kirman, Damascus, Jerusalem, and elsewhere (Watt,1985: 92).The madrasas which proliferated in every city after 1050 added to thisdispersion. The factional competition between Sunnite and ShiÀite motivatedmany of these endowments. But the factions did not intersect institutionally;madrasas specialized in one sect or the other. In addition, they remained small,typically around 10 to 20 endowed students with a single professor, althoughsome of the large colleges reached as many as 75 students (Nakosteen, 1964:42–44, 49–50; Makdisi, 1981: 31). At most, madrasas of the four legal schoolsmight amalgamate physically into a single architectural complex. Large andinternally differentiated faculties did not come into being. The expansion ofSufi orders in this period also enhanced dispersion; particular orders dominatedin outlying regions such as Anatolia, Transoxiana, North Africa, and India, asAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 511well as in Persia and the Middle East (see Figure 8.3 and its key.) Again therewere few institutional points of intersection among rival groups. The Sufiorders were largely based on lay members and thus compatible with otherpursuits. The madrasas tended to become permeated with Sufism, which tookthe edge off the mysticism and subordinated it to traditionalism and law. Themadrasas ended by producing a type not unlike the Confucian gentry, orientedto government and propriety but preserving a tinge of Taoist mysticism fortheir private lives.The Spanish episode, which was a temporary break in the later Muslimstagnation, recapitulates the early creative structure. Córdoba and Toledoprovided the focus for interconnected networks. Cordoba as the center of thewestern caliphate contained the legal, theological, and secular court networkscharacteristic of Baghdad of an earlier period. The balance existed for arelatively short time. As early as 950, the caliph had imported a huge libraryfrom the east, competing with the eastern caliphate for prestige as a center oflearning, and patronized Jewish scholars as a cosmopolitan counterweight toMuslim religious factions. The conservative side was also strong; law wasmonopolized by the Malikites, the most literalist and anti-innovative of thelaw schools, being opposed even to waqf foundations, which in the east hadbeen used to endow madrasas (Makdisi, 1981: 238). Politics swung betweenpro- and anti-secular learning. For a few generations after 1050, the balanceof networks broke into creativity. Network density was enhanced while Toledowas a base where Christian translators, Jewish religious intellectuals, and Arabscientists intermeshed. The Christian reconquest, which took this great cityfrom the Arabs in 1085, at first added pluralism to the networks rather thandestroying them. We find intellectuals of all three faiths moving about, stimulatingone another around the twin hubs, Toledo and Córdoba. Other citiesand their schools fed into these networks: Almería, Seville, Granada, Lucena,all close to Córdoba in the south. After 1200, the structure was lost. Córdobafell to the Christians in 1236; the Jewish-Arab networks were no longer linked;the translators moved on to Italy. Its structural bases gone, the Spanish goldenage was over.Which type of stagnation characterizes the later age of Islam? In somerespects there was a loss of cultural capital (Stagnation A). Ibn Rushd’s greatachievement in freeing Aristotle from Neoplatonism, as well as his own constructivephilosophy, were largely unknown in the east (Fakhry, 1983: 275).MuÀtazili rational theology was driven out as well. Insofar as there wasadulation of the classics (Stagnation B), it was in the realm of the religioustexts of Islam, and in a narrow aspect of philosophy, the studies of logic whichbecame incorporated as adjuncts to legal argument in the madrasas. Even herethere was some movement, as commentaries and supercommentaries were512 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsadded onto the texts to be mastered by students. The consensus of mosthistorians is that these commentaries are unoriginal and pedantic. But it ispossible, as Marshall Hodgson argues, that they merely have not receivedattention from Western scholars, and that technical advances are buried within.Around 1450, in Shiraz (Persia), al-Dawwani included in his supercommentarieson school logic a solution to the liar’s paradox which anticipates Russell’stheory of types (Hodgson, 1974: 2:472), and there may be more advances ofthis sort. But surely this was at least Stagnation (C), technicalities too refinedto come to wider notice. Al-Dawwani’s reputation was largely as a religiousmoralist, while his technical creativeness had little following. In the socialorganization of the intellectual world, flashes of brilliance had no reflection;the illusory stagnation of technical refinement led to the real stagnation ofclassicism and loss of past achievements.Center and Disintegration in ChristendomIn European Christendom we can follow the steps by which the central focusof intellectual life built up. There is nothing inherent about the initial attractionof Paris. In the Carolingian period, the network centers were farther east: atFulda and the Palatine court of the emperor, as well as the court at Laon. Theschools of Italy were active by 1000, though their most famous membersmoved north. An early dialectician, Anselm of Besate, wandered from Parmato Mayence, and Lanfranc from Bologna to Bec. Rosecelin taught at Compiège,Loches, Tours on the lower Loire, Besançon near the Alps (Gilson, 1944:233–234). Abelard was famous for his travels around 1100–1140, but nowthe net was confined to northern France, and he spent increasing time in Paris.Chartres was a rival center for several generations in the 1100s, but its networkflowed away into Paris by the end of the century. The advantage of Paris wasthat it provided in close compass multiple bases for intellectual life. It includedrival jurisdictions of the cathedral, the religious abbeys, the patronage of themonarchy and eventually the pope (Ferruolo, 1985: 16–17). Italy, despite itslead both in possessing classical learning and later as a place for Arabictranslations, became a periphery to the network centered on Paris. The teachersfrom Bec, Laon, Chartres, and Tours found maximal attention by congregatingin Paris. By 1200, their intersection had promoted the organization of theuniversity.The height of creativity, from 1230 to about 1360, was a time of optimalbackground conditions. Paris provided the focus, but it was balanced and fedby other universities and schools linked by migrating teachers and students.There was an especially important exchange of masters between Paris andOxford, both of which had the rare privilege of faculties of theology, owingAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 513CATHEDRAL SCHOOLS OF NORTHERN FRANCE, 1100 C.E.(From Southern, 1995, p. xix)to the political importance of the French and English kings to the papacy.Cologne with its Dominican house of studies was a third outlier, with strongnetwork ties to Paris. For a generation in the early 1300s, the papal court atAvignon became a fourth center, but full of scholars with Paris and Oxfordconnections. The highly creative philosophers (as we see in Figures 9.3 through9.6) are those in geographical overlaps, belonging to several major centers;Grosseteste, Bacon, Albertus, Aquinas, Ockham, Eckhart were at two centers,Scotus at three. These figures incorporate in their own persons the intellectualrepresentations of the intersecting centers.At the same time, the centers contained multiple grounds of factionalism.There were the rival orders of Franciscans and Dominicans; there were internalorganizational conflicts within the most powerful order; there was the jealousyof secular theologians against the privileges of the orders at the universities;there was a struggle for control and autonomy between theological and artsfaculties. Conflicts took place across multiple dimensions. The two great orders,emerging in the 1220s, by 1231 had laid claim to two theology chairs atParis. In 1255 the secular theology masters tried to have the mendicant ordersforbidden from lecturing at Paris; it was only with the intervention of the popethat in 1257 Bonaventure and Aquinas were confirmed in their chairs—thelatter surrounded by an armed bodyguard to protect him from the seculars(Gilson, 1944: 438; Hyman and Walsh, 1983: 505). This was the setting inwhich the secular theologian Henry of Ghent attacked Aquinas at Paris in the1270s, and Aquinas had attacked the claims of the arts masters to independencefrom theological orthodoxy. Around 1315 the chancellor, Henry ofHarclay, attacked the Dominicans for attempting to teach at Oxford withoutreceiving a local M.A. (Gilson, 1944: 632); soon after, Harclay’s (probable)student William of Ockham attacked the Realism of the theological philosophy,which was now official doctrine of the orders. Such external bases of factionalstruggle within the university provided part of the energy of intellectualcreation.The inner differentiation of the university and its autonomous field ofintellectual combat were two important ingredients of creativity. But they wereeffective only when combined with the centralization which brought all thenetworks together. For the life of philosophy, the university structured aroundthe higher faculty of theology was the key. Paris was not the only place wherea university corporation was formed. Law teachers and students were formingguilds at Bologna by around 1100. Parallel with Paris in the late 1100s,universities were also growing up at Oxford, Montpellier, and Salerno, thelatter two predominantly medical. With the exception of Oxford, which becamea network satellite of the Paris metropolis, these other universities hadalmost no impact in the world of philosophy of this period. The same was trueAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 515in the 1200s, when universities were formed at Naples and Padua (along withsmaller ones) in Italy; at Salamanca and Valladolid (again with smaller ones)in Spain; Cambridge in England; and Toulouse, Angers, and Orléans in Franceitself. Many of the smaller schools specializing in law did not even have artsfaculties (Cobban, 1988: 3). As far as philosophy is concerned, the otheruniversities acted at best as feeders for higher studies at Paris.After 1300, the situation began to change. In Figures 9.5 and 9.6 we seethe dispersion of intellectual life to many places, both inside and outside theuniversities. Especially in the late 1300s and the 1400s, we find independentmystics in Germany and the Netherlands, Humanists in Italy, Jews in southernFrance and Italy, and Averroists in the medical and legal faculties in Italy, wherephilosophy had previously shown little penetration; nominalists were prominentin the universities in Germany. After 1350 Oxford no longer stood out,and the Paris networks were fading.The decline of abstract philosophy was not due to the decline of theuniversity itself. On the contrary, this was a period of accelerating growth ofthe university system as a whole (see Table 9.1). By the end of the 1200s, therewere 18 universities, 12 of them major in size and importance. By 1400 therewere 34 universities, 18 of them major; by 1500 there were 56. Even moreuniversities were founded, but many of them failed. The failure rate went upduring these centuries; between 1300 and 1500, about half of all universityfoundations were failures.19 The market for educational credentials was expandingexplosively, but at the same time flooding the market, raising the riskof failure and of losing former prestige.More universities existed, but they were becoming smaller. Paris at itsheight around 1280–1300 had some 6,000 to 7,000 students; the numberbegan falling in the 1300s and dropped below 3,000 by 1450. Bologna rivaledParis’s size in the early 1200s but fell behind thereafter. Oxford may have hada maximum of 3,000 students in the 1200s; there were an estimated 1,500 in1315 and fewer than 1,000 in 1438; by 1500–1510 the yearly average wasdown to 124. Toulouse may have had 2,000 students at its height; this fell to1,380 teachers and students in 1387 and below 1,000 in the 1400s. Avignon(founded in 1303) and Orléans had 800 to 1,000 students, mainly in law, inthe 1390s; these numbers fell off drastically in the following century. Thesmaller French and Italian universities never had more than a few hundredstudents at their height, and they often closed for lack of students.The proliferation of universities was especially rapid in Italy and Spain, andhere the failure rates were highest. Italy had an overwhelming 80 percent failurerate in the 1300s and 1400s. France too experienced a considerable numberof foundings; it reached a failure rate of at least 78 percent in the 1400s.Expansion in Germany and in central and far northern Europe was more suc-516 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsTABLE 9.1. UNIVERSITY FOUNDATIONS AND FAILURES, 1000–1600Total Italy France BritainGerman Empire,Scandinavia,Low Countries Iberia1000sF  1f  0T  1MF  11100sF  6f  17%T  5M1mF  3f  1T  2M1mF  2T  2MF  1T  1M1200sF  19f  37%T  12M6mF  8f  3T  4M4mF  5f  2T  4M1mF  1T  2MF  5f  2T  2M1m1300sF  34f  47%T  18M14mF  15f  12T  4M7mF  5f  1T  5M4mF  1f  1T  2MF  10f  2T  6M2mF  3T  2M3m1400sF  41fa  48%T  22M34mF  5f  4T  5M7mF  9f  7T  5M6mF  3T  2M3mF  15f  4T  8M11mF  9f  5T  2M7m1500sF  54f  31%T  23M70mF  5f  2T  4M11mF  4f  1T  4M9mF  2T  3M4mF  18f  2T  9M26mF  25f  12T  3M20mTotals 1000–1600F  155f  39%F  37f  60%F  25f  44%F  8f  13%F  43f  19%F  42f  45%Source: Collins, 1981, p. 517. From Rashdall, 1936; Shepherd, 1964: No. 100; The Cambridge ModernHistory Atlas 1912, Map 9; Kagan (in Stone, 1974:355–405).Notes: F  foundations; f  failures; T  total in existence at end of century; M  major universities;m  minor universities.a. Includes “paper universities” given legal charters, but which did not actually come into existence.Rashdall (1936, Vol. II:325–331) lists 10 of these, mostly in the 1300s, and notes that his list is probablyvery incomplete for the 1400s. Hence this failure rate is probably 10–15% too low.cessful.20 Here there was less initial competition over students. The first universityin the region was founded at Prague in 1347, which carried on successfullywith some 1,500 students until the early 1400s. Vienna, Cologne, andLeipzig succeeded to the leadership, with as many as 1,000 students at varioustimes in the 1400s. The smaller German universities varied from 80 to 400students, hitting their peak around 1450–1480 and declining thereafter.One might expect this institutional growth to be associated with intellectualcreativity, but the opposite happened. Significant networks were not maintained;a central focus was lost. None of the new universities acquired anythinglike the drawing power that Paris once commanded. Instead of a structure inwhich multiple bases of factionalism intersect at a center, factionalism itselfbecame geographically localized. Intellectual borders hardened; conflict nolonger produced creative realignments but merely resulted in a habitual reiterationof dividing lines. Partly responsible was a decline in the internationalismof the old high medieval centers, set in motion by external political forces.Already in 1303 the French king was putting pressure on the Paris theologiansto support him in conflict with the pope; foreign scholars who refused, includingDuns Scotus, temporarily left Paris (Gilson, 1944: 710–711). There was agrowing tendency for scholars to stay at home. Now the French and Englishwars restricted Englishmen from studying or teaching in France, and vice versa.This nationalism was a new development, since earlier wars had not disturbedthe unity of Christendom. It was the new efforts of the rulers to control thenow highly developed church bureaucracy that was removing the institutionsof religious learning as a neutral meeting place. The papacy, responding toslights in one place, licensed universities elsewhere; for instance, in 1316 thepope licensed Toulouse to teach theology, overturning the monopoly of Paristheologians in France. In 1359 a theological faculty was granted to a newuniversity at Florence, although it failed quickly for lack of students. In 1364the preeminent legal university, Bologna, finally was granted a theologicalfaculty (Cobban, 1988: 144). The schism in the papacy, in which rival popesarose almost every year from 1378 to 1449, fostered yet further foundationsand rivalries.Nationalism and local factionalism made a self-reinforcing spiral. Previouslythe Paris masters had the right, granted by the pope, to teach in alluniversities without reexamination; now this was contested by Oxford andMontpellier. Universities now tended to break apart along intellectual lines(de Wulf, 1937–1947: 3:50–196). Strong nominalist universities included Vienna(founded in 1365), where the curriculum required only nominalist texts,Heidelberg (founded in 1386), Erfurt (1392), Cracow (1397), and Leipzig(1409). Cologne, where the old Dominican school was displaced by a degreegrantinguniversity in 1388, was a stronghold of Thomism. At Louvain,founded about 1425, the statutes prohibited the teaching of “nominalists,”518 • Intellectual Communities: Western Pathsincluding Ockham and Buridan. The nominalists were periodically forced out,leaving Paris in 1407 and returning in 1437 after Paris was recaptured by theEnglish; in 1474 Louis XI banned nominalism, though rescinding the edict in1481. Oxford, by contrast, became strongly nominalist. The orders, oncecenters of creativity, now were frozen in their official doctrines. The Dominicans,who had made Thomism compulsory in 1309, were increasingly barredfrom England by the strength of the Franciscans. Life for the Dominicans onthe Continent became uneasy as well: they left Paris in 1387, then returned in1403 as the result of changing fortunes in the Hundred Years’ War. Thestronghold of Thomism became primarily the universities of Spain, where theCounterreformation eventually added its weight to make Thomism virtuallythe criterion of faith against heretics; by the same token, it became anathemato Protestants.The universities now were intellectual fortresses. Change came no longerby internally generated creativity, but when a school was taken by storm whenexternal politics changed. The very labels “nominalist,” “realist,” “Scotist”had now hardened from the inchoate movements of the earlier period intonames hurled in battle.The Humanists, who treated all the “schoolmen” as an object of satire,added no relief but only one more faction. Humanism was a symptom of thecrisis of decentralization and fragmentation of the attention space. The Humanistsdid not begin the critique of scholasticism; it had already started fromwithin. Nor was Humanism and the inflow of texts from the east a historicaldeus ex machina which just happened to restart intellectual life in a newdirection after the fall of Byzantium. There had been plenty of contacts withByzantium since the period of the Crusades; but there was no intellectual lifethere, and European Christian thinkers had no need to rely on imported textswhile they were creating philosophies of their own. There was a structuralreason why intellectuals began looking for new imports once the universitieshad lost their focus, and why those who did the most energetic searching werethose who had acquired a rival base as courtier-intellectuals. And once the fieldstarts relying on imports rather than indigenous creativity, philosophy entersthe usual trough. The shift from the dense creative networks of the HighMiddle Ages to the sparse and broken ones of the Renaissance period is typicalof generations of importers; the motive to import came from the crisis ofsuccess in the expansion of universities.Academicization as a Two-Edged SwordWe face a disturbing paradox. Schools provide the material base and theinsulation from lay conceptions which allow intellectuals to pursue their ownideas. But schools are also places of routine and pedantry. Formalism developsAcademic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 519for its own sake; texts are memorized and covered with commentaries; refinementsbecome narrow and trivial. We see this in the Christian universities after1300. Even the surge of new foundations in this period did not breathe freshlife into learning. The Islamic madrasas were scholastic from the outset; theirexpansion brought activity only in the form of piling up supercommentariesupon traditional texts. The maths of the rival Hindu orders were for the mostpart similarly scholarly, sectarian, and dogmatic. In Greco-Roman antiquity,too, the level of support for formal education does not correlate with the timesof creativity; the municipal schools of 250–500 c.e., with their high salariesand their representation of the rival philosophies, repeated the traditionalpositions in set rhetorical forms. Most of these educational systems centeredon dialectic and debate, but without promoting innovation. The contest itselfbecame a static form of training and display.Neither madrasas nor Greek schools were universities in the Europeansense. Academic institutions in China came closer to this structure. The imperialuniversity of the Han, and especially its expansion in the T’ang andsubsequent dynasties, had a differentiated faculty and trained for a series ofacademic degrees. It was involved in much the same credentialing dynamicsfor bureaucratic careers found in medieval Christendom when the universitiesprepared students for careers in papal administration. But the prosperousperiods of the university tended to be intellectually the most stagnant. Theheight of student population in the Han was the time when Confucianism wasformalized into textual orthodoxy; the huge examination system of the Mingenforced Neo-Confucianism as an endless set of standard exercises. Similarly,Buddhist intellectual life was stifled after the late T’ang, when the governmentrequired formal examinations for certificates to become a monk.The tendency of schools, with their formal curricula and examinations, isconservative. Yet sometimes the schools are the center of creativity. We seethis when formal schooling was first institutionalized in Athens and in Alexandria,and there were later moments of upsurge especially at the latter. InChina, the creative period of Neo-Confucianism was connected to the developmentof private schools and the movement to reform the university and theofficial examinations. In Japan, the first three generations of the Neo-Confucianschools were the height of innovation in philosophy, falling off as thenumber of schools multiplied in the later Tokugawa. The forming of theEuropean schools in the 1100s was the milieu of creativity; in the next centurythe process of formalization in the university, the piling up of authorities andproofs known as “scholasticism,” was the vehicle for the higher developmentof philosophy. Only in the Islamic madrasas was a creative phase missing; andeven here one can point to al-Ghazali’s sophisticated destruction of philosophy,formulated at the great government-sponsored madrasa in Baghdad within thefirst generation of its foundation.520 • Intellectual Communities: Western PathsAcademicization is a two-edged sword. The material base that schoolsprovide for intellectual life can be positive or negative in supporting creativity.The tendencies toward rote learning, narrow technique, and a routine ofexercises and exams are always present. When they are overlaid by the energiesof building new career paths and reorganizing intellectual space, the result iscreative breakthroughs in the realm of higher abstractions. It is only when afine balance holds among intersecting factions at a focus of attention thatcreativity exists. Disturbing the balance or removing the focus, one may be leftwith the material institutions and large numbers of intellectuals, but settledinto scholastic routine. With this comes the stagnation of classics and technicalities,and eventually an atmosphere in which the more creative high pointsmay even be forgotten. Stagnation in all its forms is a danger of academicsuccess.Coda: The Intellectual Demoralization of the Late Twentieth CenturyDe te fabula narratur. What we see around ourselves in recent decades hasbeen an enormous expansion of cultural production. There are over 1 millionpublications annually in the natural sciences, over 100,000 in the social sciences,and comparable numbers in the humanities (Price, 1986: 266). Toperceive the world as a text is not too inaccurate a description, perhaps not ofthe world itself, but of the life position of intellectuals: we are almost literallyburied in papers. As the raw size of intellectual production goes up, the rewardto the average individual goes down—at least the pure intellectual rewards ofbeing recognized for one’s ideas and of seeing their impact on others. Thepessimism and self-doubt of the intellectual community under these circumstancesis not surprising.Which of the three types of stagnation do we exemplify? Loss of culturalcapital (Stagnation A), certainly, marked by the inability of today’s intellectualsto build constructively on the achievements of their predecessors. Simultaneouslythere exists a cult of the classics (Stagnation B): the historicism andfootnote scholarship of our times, in which doing intellectual history becomessuperior to creating it. And also we have the stagnation (C) of technicalrefinement: to take just a few instances, the acute refinements and formalismsof logical and linguistic philosophy have proceeded apace in little specializedniches; in the same way among all factions of the intellectual world today wefind the prevalence of esoterica, of subtleties, and of impenetrable in-groupvocabularies. As with the nominalists and other scholastics of the 1300s and1400s, today’s intellectual technicalities sometimes offer a high level of insightin their own spheres, but they are overrefined to travel well outside.In our own day, as at the end of medieval Christendom, all three types ofstagnation exist and interact. The underlying cause rests not with any individ-Academic Expansion: Medieval Christendom • 521ual failure, nor with the quality of our ideas, but with the structure of intellectualcommunities and their material foundations. Dark Ages of the mindare not necessarily ushered in by material collapse, but can occur in times ofmaterial abundance; a major cause is overabundance and dispersion of thematerial means of intellectual production.An enormous expansion and decentralization of the academic world hastaken place since 1950. The United States, which began this process somewhatearlier than other wealthy societies, has more than 3,000 colleges and universities,and scores of them are in the running to claim intellectual attention.Similar expansion took place in the decades after 1950 in France, Germany,Britain, Italy, Japan, and subsequently throughout the world, with similardecentralizing effects. Education has become a currency controlling opportunitiesfor employment; it now expands autonomously through the interplaybetween credential inflation, driven by the competition for more schooling, andthe resulting rise in the credential requirements of jobs. As each level ofeducation becomes saturated and deflated in value, superordinate markets forcultural credentials are added beyond them. The relations between the supplyof and demand for education are circular and self-reinforcing; the spiral ispointed upward with no end in sight (Collins, 1979; Ramirez and Boli-Bennett,1982; Bourdieu, 1988).The production of academic intellectuals rides on this wave of credentialinflation. As demand expands for educational certificates, there comes anincrease in the numbers of higher degree holders to train those of the next rankdown, an explosion of Ph.D.’s. And since these scholars struggle for positionsby means of their publishing reputations, the output of scholarship follows thesame inflationary path as the competition for lower academic degrees, a metamarketdriven upward upon the expansion of higher education.Analogous processes take place in the commercial markets of popularculture. In this atmosphere of superordinate arenas of cultural productionpyramiding upon one another, the content of modern culture has becomeself-reflex and ironic. We see this both in the pop culture, with its themes ofprivatized alienation and showy nihilism, and in the successive waves ofironicization among intellectuals, of which postmodernism is only the latest.The content of the postmodern message is an ideology of cultural producersin a highly pyramided market structure, where nothing in sight seems to touchsolid earth.Our structural condition as intellectuals can be summarized in the phrase:loss of a center of intersecting conflicts, loss of the small circle of circles atwhich our arguments can be focused. It is not a center of agreement that islacking; creative intellectual periods never had that. What is lost is a nexuswhere disagreements are held in tension, the limited attention space whichhistorically has been the generator of creative fame.