APPENDIX 1£The Clustering ofContemporaneous CreativityThe typical pattern throughout world networks is for philosophers of a similarlevel of creative eminence to cluster in the same generations. For China, themain exceptions are the following:Major Year SecondaryConfucius 480 b.c.e.450 Tseng TzuMo Ti 420380 Yang Chu80 c.e. Wang Ch’ung950 Ch’en T’uan1480 Ch’en Hsien-ChangWang Yang-ming 1520 Lo Ch’in-shunCases are not counted as mismatches which arise only through arbitraryplacement of borderlines in ranking or between generations.The most important isolates are the two earliest major philosophers on thechart, Confucius and Mo Ti, and the last, Wang Yang-ming. These are trulymajor figures; especially the first two, whose names dominated Chinese thoughtin one case for several thousand years, in the latter case several hundred. Buthere we may be victim of a retrospective illusion. As I have discussed in Chapter4, the philosophical work of these two men was rudimentary; it was theirlineages which gradually built up their towering reputations. Confucius andMo Ti are more important as founders of organizations and symbolic figureheadsthan as intellectual creators. Thus in the next generation after Confuciusthe most noted name is Tseng Tzu (listed as borderline minor), who is merelythe best remembered of the leaders of some seven or eight organizationallineages which branched off at that point. Confucius, Tseng Tzu, and the otherminor figures of this time ought to be taken as a movement, none of whosereputations would have survived without the others.883Mo Ti, who branches off from one of these Confucian schools anothergeneration later, was building intellectually upon his opposition to the Confucian“establishment.” The case of Mo Ti’s eminence is structurally similar toConfucius’, especially since in both cases it is unclear which parts of theirdoctrines—and their canonical texts—are the work of the founders and whichare the work of followers. There is reason to believe that much of the philosophicalrefinement of the older part of the Mo Tzu is the work of Mo’sprincipal pupil, Ch’in Ku-li (28 in Figure 4.1). This casts light on the positionof Yang Chu, who appears in this generation as an isolated secondary figure.But Yang Chu stirred up great controversy in his day with his doctrine thatthe Way of Heaven is to nourish the vital needs of the individual, rather thanassume social obligations. Moreover, Yang Chu is structurally locked in antagonismwith the Confucians, and especially the Mohists, as he is known tohave debated with Ch’in Ku-li. In view of the likelihood that “individualist”or “agriculturalist self-sufficiency” doctrines branched off from the Mohistlineage around this time (e.g., Hsu Hsing in the next generation after Ch’inKu-li), it appears that we have here another case where creative alternativesare being formulated in counterpoint with one another.The main cases of horizontal isolation that remain consist of one majorfigure and several secondary ones. The major philosopher is Wang Yang-ming,who enlivened the dead orthodoxy of the Ming dynasty. But even though helacks a rival of major stature, he belongs to a cluster in his youthful andmature generations (i.e., 1465–1500 and 1500–35) which includes severalsecondary figures both from the dominant Ch’eng-Chu Neo-Confucians andin opposition, in addition to those who branch off from Wang’s own school.Here there is at least partial eminence against his major eminence. This leavestwo secondary figures: Ch’en T’uan is a borderline minor figure, a Taoistcosmologist ca. 950 c.e., a time when not much is happening apart from minorfigures of the Ch’an lineages. Ch’en T’uan is not a vertical isolate, since heleads into what eventually becomes the neo-Confucian cosmologists four generationslater.The most isolated figure in the entire Chinese chart is Wang Ch’ung, theonly name of any significance for four generations of the Later Han (i.e., theentire period from 35 to 165 c.e.). Wang Ch’ung is also among the mostunusual intellectually as well, an outspoken rationalist and enemy of superstition.In his themes he continues the critical scholarship of the Old Text school,which had arisen in opposition to the occultism, false antiquarianism, anddownright forgeries of the so-called New Text school. That is to say, this wasa battle within Confucianism between the occultist synthesis which TungChung-shu had brought to prominence around 130 b.c.e., and the movementof critical textual scholars which had come to prominence with Liu Hsin884 • Appendix 1around 1 c.e. (Fung, 1952–53: 2:133–167). But Wang Ch’ung lacks an importantcontemporary rival on the occultist side. Here we encounter a seemingexception to the pattern of contemporary rival creativity.Among the Greeks, the apparent exceptions are as follows:Major Year SecondaryCarneades 180 b.c.e.120 c.e. Calvenus Taurus220 OrigenPlotinus 250 ManiPorphyry 280Proclus 450Once again I do not count mismatches based only on small differences inranking or timing. Pythagoras and Plato, although having no contemporariesin their maturity to match their truly eminent stature, nevertheless have quitea bevy of rivals. Not only is Plato the most eminent of the Greeks, but also helived in the generation richest in new developments, matched against sixphilosophers listed as secondary in Figure 3.4. Arcesilaus and Chrysippus bothoverlapped in time and personally debated; Carneades, the great AcademicSkeptic, comes close on Chrysippus’ heels. What we have here is a successionof overlapping generations, the Academic and Stoic schools, counterpunchingat a pace of about thirty years. Carneades himself recognized this: “If therewere no Chrysippus, there would be no me” (Tarrant, 1985: 127).Plotinus seems a mismatch against Gnostic Mani, a secondary figure forphilosophy, and Porphyry in the next generation lacks important rivals. Butthe parallel is closer when we realize that Mani is founder of the Manichaeanheresy, which was to receive great philosophical attention within Christianityjust as Plotinus was founding a religious version of Platonism that was tobecome the philosophical rallying point for pagans in their struggle againstChristianity. Moreover, Origen, Plotinus, and Porphyry overlap and take offon one another’s turf, and Porphyry turns up the anti-Christian note into anexplicit polemic, for the first time in the Neoplatonist tradition. The closepersonal contact among these builders of rival positions confirms their mutualorientation to a common division in the field. Augustine is contemporary inthe west with the great Church Fathers of the east, Gregory of Nyssa andGregory Nazianzen, although Augustine’s work in philosophy lacks the rivalcounterpart it has in theology. Proclus still eludes the structural generalization:a major figure without significant rivals or contemporaries. Although he isconnected to all the important chains of adjacent generations, these includeonly minor figures in terms of long-run importance.It is worth briefly comparing the lists of horizontal isolates from contem-The Clustering of Contemporaneous Creativity • 885porary creativity with lists of major or secondary philosophers who are verticalisolates from significant master-pupil chains:China:Shen Pu-HaiShang YangTao Te Ching authorWang Ch’ungGreece:MelissusLucretiusNumenius of ApameaManiPseudo-DionysiusThe Tao Te Ching author may not belong on this list. That person, I wouldconjecture, was probably in the network of the followers of Chuang Tzu andthose around Kung-sun Lung, most likely at the court of Wei; but I will notpress the point. The anonymous Mohist Canons, however, were surely producedin the network of known figures of the Mohist schools.There are relatively few and unimportant figures who are isolated fromsignificant master-pupil chains or other personal ties among well-known intellectuals.Lucretius is perhaps the most notable exception here.The network patterns of Greek and Chinese philosophers are representativeof what we find throughout world history. In medieval Islam, Judaism, Christendomand modern Europe, episodes of creativity occur among contemporaryrivals and in significant intergenerational chains. There are relatively fewexceptions. Among philosophers listed as major, we find only the following:Horizontal isolates (lack of significant rivals):Ibn Sina (Avicenna) 1120 c.e. IranAl-Ghazali 1180 Iraq, IranVertical isolates (lack of intellectual network ties):NoneThe major Jewish philosopher-scientist Levi ben Gerson (early 1300s), as faras we know, was not directly connected with the minor Jewish philosophersin southern France of his day; but he was connected with the papal court atAvignon at just the period when it was the center for numerous Christianphilosophers, and thus probably had an indirect connection to the latternetwork (DSB, 1981: 8:279–280).Even these may not be so very exceptional. Ibn Sina lacks significant philo-886 • Appendix 1sophical contemporaries other than the secondary figure Miskawayh, but heis matched with scientific stars, and his own work is to a considerable extentin science (see Figure 8.2 and the discussion in Chapter 8). Al-Ghazali lived ina time when the Islamic intellectual world was closing down into religiousdogmatism; nevertheless, very close to him in time and space is the famousmathematician and philosophical poet ÀUmar Khayyam.There are more exceptions among secondary philosophers:Horizontal isolates (lack of significant rivals):Hasan al-Basri 720 c.e. IraqAbu Hanifa 750 IraqIbn Taymiyah 1320 DamascusIbn Khaldun 1380 Algeria, EgyptBassui 1380 JapanIkkyu 1450 JapanAlan of Lille 1180 ParisCusanus 1450 Germany, ItalyVertical isolates (lack of significant network ties):Bahya ibn Paquda 1050 c.e. SpainIbn Hazm 1080 CórdobaIbn Khaldun 1380 Algeria, EgyptBassui 1380 JapanPeter Damiani 1050 ItalyLull 1280 Spain, FranceBruno 1580 Italy, England, GermanyBoehme 1620 GermanyVico 1720 ItalyPaley 1780 EnglandMach 1880 PragueBruno may not belong on this list if in fact he is connected to the network atNaples deriving from Telesio in the previous generation, or with the otherradical Dominicans from whom Campanella emerged (see Figure 9.6 in Chapter9).On the whole, there are relatively few philosophers in world history whoare isolates of either kind. In six long-term networks (Greece, China, Japan,Islam, Christendom, Europe), 114 philosophers are listed as major figures; ofthese between 4 and 8 (Confucius, Mo Ti, Wang Yang-ming; Carneades,Porphyry, Proclus; Ibn Sina, al-Ghazali) have no important contemporary rivals(the lower figure if we admit the importance of nearby figures for WangYang-ming, Carneades, Ibn Sina, and al-Ghazali). There are even fewer net-The Clustering of Contemporaneous Creativity • 887work isolates at this level of eminence: only 1 of 114, the Tao Te Ching author,and even in this case, as indicated, a plausible network connection can beconjectured.India is omitted because dating is often obscure and information on networkties is missing. Figures 5.1 through 5.5 list figures by century only ratherthan by generation. Even here, there are apparently only 2 horizontal isolates,and those among the secondary figures, lacking corresponding rivals in theircentury (Aryadeva 200s c.e., Raghunatha Shiromani, 1400s c.e.). The firsttwo important Upanishadic philosophers appeared together and debated eachother; the founders of the three great organized lineages of ascetics, GautamaBuddha, Mahavira, and Makkali Gosala, emerged simultaneously in a networkof debates; later Buddhist and Hindu philosophers are generally quite tightlymatched. Vertical linkages from one important figure to another, however, aremuch sparser in India than elsewhere. Although such ties are fairly dense onthe Buddhist side, and at certain key periods among the Hindu philosophers(as in the key Mimamsa and Advaita Vedanta thinkers around Shankara), aconsiderable portion of the Hindu philosophers are not known to connect tosignificant networks, or any networks at all.For secondary philosophers we have a total of 313 names from six worldnetworks; 14 of these are horizontal isolates, 18 or 19 network isolates. Theisolates from rival contemporary creativity include a number from the earlygenerations when philosophical traditions were just building up; this includessome of the early figures in China (Tseng Tzu, Yang Chu, similarly situated tothe more important Confucius and Mo Ti), and Islam (Hasan al-Basri, AbuHanifa), as well as philosophers isolated in the afterwash of a network whichhad disintegrated (Ibn Taymiyah, Ibn Khaldun in the later period of Islamicphilosophy; Alan of Lille in the one-generation interregnum between the twogreat networks at medieval Paris, Cusanus in the mid-1400s). Network isolatesare more likely to appear on the periphery in crowded periods, often fromdeviant backgrounds: the wandering knight Raymond Lull among the universitytheologians at Paris; the mystical shoemaker Boehme in a small townin Silesia; Vico at Naples at a time when philosophy was dominated by freethinkingnetworks in France and England while Italy was under a conservativeCatholicism. Still there are horizontal coincidences in both creativity andcontents; Vico’s Scienza Nuova of 1725 is not so far away in materials andtheme from Montesquieu’s far more successful L’Esprit des Lois, written1731–1748. The network-isolated Utilitarian-Deist theologian Paley is overmatchedby his contemporary Bentham, who centers one of the most importantintergenerational networks. Such isolates tend to pay the structural price ofbeing outcompeted for attention in the long run by better-connected thinkers.If we collate the two charts of isolates, horizontal and vertical, we find888 • Appendix 1almost no one who is isolated on both dimensions. In all of world history thereare only three significant philosophers who fill this description: Wang Ch’ungin China; Bassui Tokusho in Japan; and Ibn Khaldun in Islam. All are secondaryfigures in the influence they have exerted in the history of their respectivephilosophical communities. Bassui is one of the few notable Zen monks duringa period (1365–1600) when the spiritual innovativeness of Japanese Buddhismwas in decline. Wang Ch’ung stands out as an oasis in the desert of intellectualnetworks of the Later Han dynasty. There is some thematic competitionnevertheless, in that his aggressively secularizing rationalism is structured incounterpoint to the occultism of his times, and carries on the battles of theOld Text school of a few generations earlier. Ibn Khaldun is somewhat similar,an opponent of the scholasticizing curriculum which by his day had dominatedthe Islamic madrasas for several centuries. Both Wang Ch’ung and Ibn Khaldunwere advocates of empirical methods; Ibn Khaldun implemented this with awide-ranging achievement as historian and comparative sociologist. Underthese structural circumstances their successful creativity is mysterious. But itmay be partially understandable in theme. Without philosophical networks andimportant contemporary rivals, it appears impossible to carry on work athigher levels of metaphysical abstraction; criticism and empiricism may be theonly direction open in which something notable could be done.