APPENDIX 2£The Incompleteness ofOur Historical PictureHistorical sources, especially for remote periods, are often fragmentary, andthe whole enterprise of reconstructing intellectual communities may seem likelooking for landmarks in the mist. But history itself was not mist but structure,however it may sometimes seem to us trying to catch a glimpse in the distance.For all the failings and biases of our sources, I am nevertheless moderatelyconfident of having included most of the creative philosophers in my pool,with a fair sense of the more routine or ephemeral intellectuals who made upthe surrounding communities. For one slice of history, for example, Liu Hsin’scatalogue of the imperial library ca. 20 b.c.e. gave a total of 198 authors (53classified as ju, or “scholars”—i.e., Confucians—37 as “Taoist,” 21 Yin-Yang,10 Legalist, 6 Mohist, 7 Logicians, 64 others; Knoblock, 1988: 65–66). Abouta quarter of these books survive today. My networks for this period of ancientChina, covering about 15 generations, include some 75 names, something morethan one third of those who had enough distinction for their works to last thatlong.More complete historical data (and more patience in working through thedetails of what is available) could add hundreds more figures to the kinds ofnetworks I have presented; in an ideal situation of unlimited data, we mightimagine charting the networks among all active intellectuals (maybe on theorder of thousands in some epochs). But as Price ([1963] 1986: 69, 107–108,257) has demonstrated for modern citation and publication data (extendingback to scientists of the 1600s), the proportion of publications by and citationsto (and hence the influence of) intellectuals falls off rapidly as one leaves thecentral core. This kind of work would add only to the tails of the distribution,further demonstrating the disproportionate success of the tiny sector at thecenter. Many figures lapsed into oblivion because they were indeed minor.For these reasons I am doubtful that new archaeological discoveries woulddrastically revise our view of the main events of intellectual history. To be sure,we would love to have additional information. Who wrote the Tao Te Ching,890in the midst of what network ties, and how did the work get put into circulation?Who wrote the Mohist Canons, and what precisely was the process ofdebate among the three “heretical” factions of Mohism that went on at thisperiod? Perhaps these names are already on our chart (numbers 57–61 in thekey to Figure 4.2), but it would be wonderful to pin down the circumstancesof producing this high point of Chinese rationalistic logic and mathematicalphilosophy. Who precisely, within the Confucian schools, was responsible forthe Doctrine of the Mean and the “Great Appendix” to the Yi Ching? ForIndia we would even more like to pin down the life of Nagarjuna, to knowmore about Asanga, the two Vasubandhus, to add some of the richness ofsecondary and minor figures that we have for other regions; we would like tobe able to explore what is behind the scattered names of philosophers in theUpanishads, and to know when and by whom were composed the Buddhistsutras, which often foreshadowed technical philosophical doctrines in a scripturalform.For Greece and the West generally (including the Islamic philosophers),anonymity is less of a problem; despite the cult of antiquity that sometimesemerged, creative work was usually propagated under the author’s own name.Our main problem of this kind is the Christian-occultist syncretist Pseudo-Dionysus, a secondary figure ca. 450 c.e. We would like to be able fill in moreabout certain mysterious figures: Ammonius Saccas, who taught both Plotinusand the Christian Origen (could he have been a “gymnosophist” from the orbitof India? although scholars think not); the Alexandria Skeptic Aenesidemus;the milieu of Philo of Alexandria, popping up out of nowhere onto a majorposition on the chart; Lucretius, the great Roman Epicurean, whose life is completelyunknown. We would like to know more about the early figures, to knowwhat Thales really did and what was legend; what were Pythagoras’ owncontributions, and what went on inside the Pythagorean organization. And ofcourse we would like to have full texts of Heraclitus’ book, of Parmenides’and Empedocles’ famous poems, and other works of the pre-Socratics.It would also be useful to know more about missing network ties of eminentpersons. Who were the teachers of Hui Shih or Chuang Tzu? From whom ifanyone did Heraclitus get his learning? But the lack of information about thesefigures implies that the persons in question were minor indeed; perhaps theymight provide an incidental link to some other milieu of importance. Thisinformation might confirm the initial impression that a few creative figures“come out of nowhere,” apart from existing chains of eminence, although Isuspect that the tendency would be to add connections to yet further minorfigures. On the downstream side, such information might strengthen my claimabout secondary eminence being the result of the transmission of cultural capital.If we knew, for instance, who were the anonymous followers who compiledThe Incompleteness of Our Historical Picture • 891the Chuang Tzu, we could assign them a portion of the reputation which hasaccrued instead for the book.Still, we must ask ourselves if having this information would drasticallyrevise our picture of intellectual structures. Would it cause us to change ourrankings of particular philosophers? Democritus, who wrote many books, alllost, would probably be further enhanced in our eyes (perhaps especiallycasting light on the early development of mathematics); but we rank him as amajor figure in any case. Similarly Chrysippus, who has the reputation as themost acute technical thinker of the Stoic school. Or in China, Hui Shih, whose“books filled five carts”; or Kung-sun Lung, the other famous logician. Wewould clearly be enriched, but the pattern of eminence in the network chartwould not change. It is conceivable that some figures might be elevated: suchas Leucippus, reputed founder of atomism, but who receives only ancillarymention, from earliest sources onward, as a predecessor of Democritus. Wewould perhaps be full of admiration for the lost works of the logicians of theMegarian school, and some of the Chi-hsia Academicians might rise to greaterheights in our eyes, which is to say, some secondary figures might move toborderline major, or some minor figures up to secondary. Still, our indicationsof what these figures did do already seem reflected in their remembered reputations.Within broad categories, I believe that we already understand thestratification of creativity that actually existed.